Molecular Determinants of the Yeast
Arc1p–Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetase Complex Assembly
Eleftherios Karanasios1
, Hannes Simader2
, George Panayotou3
,
Dietrich Suck2 and George Simos1
⁎
1
Laboratory of Biochemistry,
Department of Medicine,
University of Thessaly,
22 Papakyriazi Street,
Larissa 41222, Greece
2
Structural and Computational
Biology Unit, European
Molecular Biology Laboratory,
Meyerhofstrasse 1,
D-69117 Heidelberg, Germany
3
Protein Chemistry Laboratory,
Biomedical Sciences Research
Center “Alexander Fleming,”
Vari 16672, Greece
Received 9 August 2007;
received in revised form
29 September 2007;
accepted 3 October 2007
Available online
11 October 2007
Eukaryotic aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases are usually organized into high￾molecular-weight complexes, the structure and function of which are poorly
understood. We have previously described a yeast complex containing two
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, methionyl-tRNA synthetase and glutamyl￾tRNA synthetase, and one noncatalytic protein, Arc1p, which can stimulate
the catalytic efficiency of the two synthetases. To understand the complex
assembly mechanism and its relevance to the function of its components, we
have generated specific mutations in residues predicted by a recent
structural model to be located at the interaction interfaces of the N-terminal
domains of all three proteins. Recombinant wild-type or mutant forms of
the proteins, as well as the isolated N-terminal domains of the two syn￾thetases, were overexpressed in bacteria, purified and used for complex
formation in vitro and for determination of binding affinities using surface
plasmon resonance. Moreover, mutant proteins were expressed as PtA or
green fluorescent protein fusion polypeptides in yeast strains lacking the
endogenous proteins in order to monitor in vivo complex assembly and their
subcellular localization. Our results show that the assembly of the Arc1p–
synthetase complex is mediated exclusively by the N-terminal domains of
the synthetases and that the two enzymes bind to largely independent sites
on Arc1p. Analysis of single-amino-acid substitutions identified residues
that are directly involved in the formation of the complex in yeast cells and
suggested that complex assembly is mediated predominantly by van der
Waals and hydrophobic interactions, rather than by electrostatic forces.
Furthermore, mutations that abolish the interaction of methionyl-tRNA
synthetase with Arc1p cause entry of the enzyme into the nucleus, proving
that complex association regulates its subcellular distribution. The
relevance of these findings to the evolution and function of the multienzyme
complexes of eukaryotic aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases is discussed.
© 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Edited by D. E. Draper Keywords: Arc1; GluRS; MetRS; tRNA; yeast
Introduction
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases represent a highly
conserved protein family that is responsible for
charging tRNAs with their cognate amino acids,
thus ensuring the faithful translation of the genetic
code.1 Eukaryotic aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases,
compared to their prokaryotic counterparts, contain
appended domains that are not directly involved in
their catalytic function. These are usually extensions
to the N- or C-termini, are missing from the
corresponding prokaryotic enzymes and may thus
serve a eukaryote-specific nonenzymatic function.
*Corresponding author. E-mail address:
simos@med.uth.gr.
Abbreviations used: MetRS, methionyl-tRNA
synthetase; GluRS, glutamyl-tRNA synthetase; MetRS-N,
N-terminal domain of MetRS; GluRS-N, N-terminal
domain of GluRS-N; SPR, surface plasmon resonance;
ITC, isothermal titration calorimetry; ORF, open reading
frame; GFP, green fluorescent protein.
doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2007.10.010 J. Mol. Biol. (2007) 374, 1077–1090
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
0022-2836/$ - see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.They may be required for nonspecific tRNA bind￾ing2–7 or for assembly into multisynthetase com￾plexes.8,9 In higher eukaryotes, synthetases do
indeed form a supramolecular complex consisting
of nine aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases and three non￾catalytic polypeptides, p43 (pro-EMAPII), p38 and
p18.10 The exact function of this complex is still
unclear. Eukaryotic aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases
have also been shown to play alternative roles.
One such role is their involvement in nucleocyto￾plasmic transport, since tRNA aminoacylation is
necessary for the efficient nuclear export of tRNA in
both vertebrates and yeast.11–13 These results have
suggested the presence of the tRNA aminoacylation
machinery inside the nucleus, which has also been
substantiated by experimental data.14–16 However,
the means of controlling the distribution of aminoa￾cyl-tRNA synthetases between the cytoplasm and
the nucleus is essentially unknown.
We have previously identified in yeast a complex
of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases consisting of
methionyl-tRNA synthetase (MetRS), glutamyl￾tRNA synthetase (GluRS) and one auxiliary protein,
Arc1p (the yeast homologue of p43).17 The associa￾tion of Arc1p with the two enzymes stimulates their
catalytic efficiency.18–20 This stimulation is mainly
due to the increased affinity of the complex for
cognate tRNAs and requires the carboxy-terminal
part of Arc1p, which harbors a tRNA-binding
domain18 and is conserved in p43, as well as in
other proteins.21,22 Arc1p is required for optimal cell
growth, since cells lacking Arc1p grow more slowly
than wild-type cells, especially at low temperatures
(between 23 °C and 15 °C). Moreover, Arc1p
becomes essential for viability in the absence of the
tRNA nuclear export factor Los1p,17,23 suggesting a
possible involvement of the Arc1p complex in the
transport of tRNA or in the localization of the tRNA
aminoacylation machinery. Previous experiments
have indeed demonstrated that MetRS, GluRS and
truncated forms of Arc1p can enter the nucleus
when not assembled in the complex, while the
ternary complex itself is strictly cytoplasmic.24
Arc1p is actively excluded from the nucleus by an
Xpo1p-dependent mechanism,24,25 suggesting that
Arc1p may be responsible for the nuclear exclusion
of its associated synthetases, MetRS and GluRS.
We have shown previously24 that the formation of
the trimeric Arc1p–MetRS–GluRS complex in vivo
requires the amino-terminally appended noncataly￾tic domains of the synthetases, both of which
interact with the amino-terminal domain (amino
acids 1–132) of Arc1p. The crystal structures of two
binary subcomplexes, consisting of the N-terminal
domain of Arc1p and the N-terminal domain of
either MetRS or GluRS, were recently determined,
and a model was proposed for the three-dimen￾sional conformation of the ternary complex.26 How￾ever, several questions concerning the formation of
the complex remained open. Do the catalytic
domains of the synthetases contribute to binding?
Is there any cooperative/synergistic effect in com￾plex assembly? Does the complex behave in vitro
and in vivo as predicted by the structural model? Is
the formation of the complex subject to regulation,
or is it related to the control of the function of its
components? To address these questions, we con￾structed point or deletion mutations and analyzed
their effect on the formation of the complex both in
vitro and in vivo.
Results
Quantitative analysis of Arc1p complex
formation
The N-domain of Arc1p contains binding sites for
the noncatalytic N-terminal extensions of MetRS
and GluRS that mediate complex formation. In
order to better characterize these binding interac￾tions, we decided to measure the affinity between
the three components of the complex. To do that,
wild-type Arc1p, two Arc1p deletion mutants Arc1-
ΔN1 (lacking amino acids 7–32) and Arc1-ΔN
(lacking the whole N-domain; i.e., amino acids
7–122), full-length wild-type GluRS and MetRS, and
the N-terminal domains of MetRS (MetRS-N; amino
acids 1–160) and GluRS (GluRS-N; amino acids
1–207), which are all shown schematically in Fig. 1,
were expressed as His-tagged recombinant proteins
in Escherichia coli and purified. In the case of the
Arc1p deletion mutants, residues 1–7 were retained
in order to avoid destabilization of the mutant
proteins by an artificial N-terminus. Samples of the
purified preparations were analyzed by SDS-PAGE
and were shown to contain recombinant proteins
free of any contaminants (data not shown). To
ensure that the full-length synthetases produced
in E. coli are structurally similar to the native
enzymes, they were subjected to circular dichroism
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of recombinant wild￾type and deletion mutants of Arc1p and the two
synthetases (MetRS and GluRS) of the Saccharomyces
cerevisiae ternary complex that were purified from E. coli
and used to determine the binding affinities by SPR. Light￾gray boxes represent the interacting N-terminal domains
of Arc1p, MetRS and GluRS. The position of each deletion
is represented by a line. Numbers refer to amino acid
residues. Numbers in parentheses indicate deleted amino
acids.
1078 Molecular Dissection of the Arc1p Complexanalysis in parallel with full-length synthetases
isolated from overproducing yeast strains.19 No
substantial differences could be detected, suggesting
that the heterologous expression caused no major
structural defects (data not shown). Similarly, the
enzymes purified from E. coli were competent in
forming a stable complex with Arc1p in vitro, as
previously demonstrated for synthetases of homo￾logous origin19 (data not shown).
The affinities between the two synthetases or their
N-terminal domain and Arc1p or its mutant Arc1-
ΔN1 were measured using the surface plasmon
resonance (SPR) method in the BIAcore system. In
these experiments, Arc1p was used as bait because it
can interact with both synthetases, and it was
therefore immobilized on a CM-5 biosensor chip by
amine group cross-linking. The synthetases or their
N-terminal domains were used as ligands and
passed over immobilized Arc1p in order to deter￾mine their affinities. To control for nonspecific
binding of the ligands to the sensor chip, the
enzymes or their domains were passed over immo￾bilized Arc1-ΔN, which is known not to interact with
the two synthetases, and their background binding
was subtracted from their binding to full-length
Arc1p or Arc1-ΔN1. An example of the original data
obtained by the BIAcore system is shown in Fig. 2a,
while Fig. 2b shows the fitting of the data into a
binding curve that allows the determination of the
equilibrium dissociation constant Kd. A summary of
the results obtained with all tested ligands is shown
in Table 1.
The results with the full-length enzymes show that
the affinity of GluRS for Arc1p (Kd = 53 nM) is almost
3.5-fold higher than the affinity of MetRS for Arc1p
(Kd = 193 nM), in agreement with previous qualita￾tive experiments showing a weaker association of
MetRS with the Arc1p complex.17 To investigate
whether the catalytic domains of the synthetases
contribute to the interaction with Arc1p, we also
measured the affinity of MetRS-N and GluRS-N for
Arc1p. GluRS-N interacts with Arc1p almost six
times stronger than full-length GluRS (Kd = 9 nM
instead of 53 nM). The same is also true for MetRS-N
(Kd = 39 nM instead of 193 nM). These data suggest
that, at least under these in vitro experimental
conditions, the catalytic domains of GluRS and
MetRS do not facilitate and even hinder the interac￾tion with Arc1p. It is likely that the presence of the
bulky catalytic domains weakens the interaction
between the N-terminal domains of the synthetases
Fig. 2. Quantitative analysis of protein–protein inter￾actions by SPR. (a) Sensorgram of MetRS N-domain
binding to Arc1p. The arrow on the left indicates the point
of addition of MetRS-N (ligand), while the arrow on the
right indicates the point of addition of the buffer. Each
curve corresponds to a different ligand concentration. (b)
Fitting of the maximal binding values for each concentra￾tion shown in (a) in a binding curve and calculation of Kd.
(c) Binding curve fitting of the maximal binding values for
each protein concentration when full-length MetRS and
GluRS are passed simultaneously over a sensor chip
containing immobilized Arc1p. The equation describing
the curve assumes two independent binding sites on
Arc1p and, accordingly, produces two corresponding Kd
values.
Molecular Dissection of the Arc1p Complex 1079and Arc1p because of steric hindrance caused by the
immobilization of Arc1p on the surface of the
biosensor chip. If this is true, then the Kd values
determined for the isolated N-terminal domains may
give a more accurate measure of the affinity between
the full-length proteins when they interact in
solution. This is supported by the finding that the
affinity of GluRS for Arc1p, as determined by
isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) when both
proteins are in solution (Kd = 27 nM), was between
the values determined by SPR for the full-length
protein and the N-terminal domain. Unfortunately, it
proved impossible to determine the MetRS–Arc1p
affinity by ITC probably due to its significantly lower
value.
We have previously demonstrated that deletion of
Arc1p amino acid residues 7–32 abolishes interac￾tion with MetRS, but not with GluRS, in vivo.
24 In
order to quantitate the involvement of Arc1p amino
acid residues 7–32 in the binding of MetRS and
GluRS, we immobilized Arc1-ΔN1 on the biosensor
chip and repeated the aforementioned analysis. Both
full-length and N-terminal MetRS showed no
affinity for Arc1-ΔN1, suggesting that the missing
part of Arc1p is indeed required for the interaction
with MetRS. On the other hand, GluRS and its
N-terminal domain still bound to Arc1-ΔN1, but
their affinity was reduced by 7- to 13-fold (Table 1),
suggesting that the very N-terminal part of Arc1p is
not required for binding to GluRS, but its deletion
may destabilize the rest of the N-terminal domain of
Arc1p, which is involved in the interaction with
GluRS. It has also been previously suggested for the
mammalian multisynthetase complex that binding
of certain components may subsequently facilitate
the assembly of additional components.27 To test
this hypothesis in the yeast complex, immobilized
Arc1p was first treated with saturating amounts of
GluRS or GluRS-N to produce the corresponding
dimeric complexes, which were subsequently
exposed to increasing concentrations of MetRS.
Prebinding of GluRS-N slightly increased the
affinity of MetRS for Arc1p (Kd = 127 nM compared
to 193 nM), while prebinding of GluRS weakened
the interaction between MetRS and Arc1p
(Kd = 315 nM compared to 193 nM), again probably
due to steric hindrance caused by the immobiliza￾tion. Therefore, no evidence suggesting that the
binding of MetRS to Arc1p was significantly
facilitated by preformation of the Arc1p–GluRS
complex could be obtained. This was confirmed by
the fact that when both MetRS and GluRS were
simultaneously passed over the Arc1p sensor chip,
the binding data could be fitted into the two-site
saturation equation, which assumes the presence of
two independent interaction sites (Fig. 2c). The
theoretical values for the predicted Kd values in this
case (43 nM and 323 nM) are in good agreement
with the Kd values determined when single proteins
were analyzed as described above (53 nM for the
Arc1p–GluRS interaction and 315 nM for the
interaction of MetRS with the preformed Arc1p–
GluRS complex). Overall, the SPR data suggest that
there is no significant synergy in the formation of the
trimeric Arc1p–GluRS–MetRS complex and that the
synthetase-binding sites on Arc1p are functionally
distinct and independent.
Mutagenesis of the interacting domains of the
Arc1p–GluRS–MetRS complex and analysis of
the in vivo functionality of the mutants
We have recently proposed a structural model for
ternary complex formation between Arc1p-, MetRS￾and GluRS-interacting domains based on the crystal
structure of the two corresponding binary com￾plexes.26 To experimentally test this model, we have
previously constructed certain point mutations,
which are shown schematically in Fig. 3a, at amino
acid residues located at the interaction interfaces
between Arc1p and MetRS or GluRS (Fig. 3b), and
we have shown that they inhibited complex forma￾tion in vitro.
26 To extend this analysis, we have now
made additional point mutants, as well as a double
mutant of Arc1p, which are also shown in Fig. 3a. To
test whether these and the previous mutations
affected the overall stability and function of the
native proteins, several of the mutant constructs
were subcloned to yeast expression plasmids that
also provided PtA or green fluorescent protein
(GFP) tags to allow detection, purification and
localization of the mutant proteins. With the help
of these plasmids, we constructed yeast strains that
lacked the endogenous proteins but expressed their
mutant counterparts. As shown in Fig. 4a by
Western blot analysis, all Arc1p mutants, except
Arc1p(A26R) and Arc1p(R100A), were expressed in
the arc1− strain. Strikingly, a mutant form of Arc1p
combining those two mutations was expressed,
albeit at lower levels than its wild-type counterpart.
Although ARC1 is not an essential gene, it becomes
essential for yeast viability upon simultaneous
deletion of the tRNA exportin gene LOS1.
17 So, to
test whether the expressed Arc1p point mutants are
functional, they were introduced into the double￾knockout strain arc1−
los1−
. All expressed Arc1p
mutants designed to disrupt complex formation
with either MetRS or GluRS were able to substitute
for the wild-type Arc1p in the arc1−
los1− knockout
strain, except for the double mutant Arc1p(A26R,
R100A), which was designed to disrupt association
Table 1. Dissociation constants (Kd ± SD; nM) of the Arc1p–
MetRS and Arc1p–GluRS interactions as determined by
SPR
Ligand–analyte MetRS MetRS-N GluRS GluRS-N
Arc1p 193 ± 11
(n= 3)
39 ± 10
(n= 3)
53 ± 23a
(n= 3)
9±1
(n= 2)
Arc1-ΔN1 − − 345 ± 65
(n= 2)
124 ± 28
(n= 2)
Arc1p–GluRS 315 ± 35 (n= 2) nd nd nd
Arc1p–GluRS-N 127 ± 7 (n= 2) nd nd nd
n, number of repeats of independent experiments using different
chips and protein batches; nd, not determined; (−) no interaction. a Determination by ITC gave a value of 27 nM.
1080 Molecular Dissection of the Arc1p ComplexFig. 3. (a) Schematic representation of point mutations at amino acid residues located at the interfaces between Arc1p
and MetRS, or between Arc1p and GluRS. The interacting N-domains of all complex proteins are drawn in light gray.
Hatched boxes with different patterns on each protein indicate amino acid sequences participating in binary interactions.
Point mutations of each protein are drawn facing the interacting protein. Mutations shown in bold are being reported for
the first time in this work. (b) Atomic details of the GluRS–Arc1p (left) and Arc1p–MetRS (right) binding interfaces
highlighting the residues targeted for mutagenesis. Residues of Arc1p, GluRS and MetRS are marked with labels in green,
red and blue, respectively. Red dotted lines represent salt bridges, while green dotted lines represent hydrogen bonds.
Molecular Dissection of the Arc1p Complex 1081with both synthetases, and cells expressing it were
not viable (Fig. 4b). A similar analysis was also
performed for the MetRS and GluRS point mutants.
As shown in Fig. 5, all MetRS and GluRS mutant
forms were stably expressed and able to comple￾ment the mes1− and gus1− knockout strains,
respectively, suggesting that the mutations in their
N-terminal domains did not affect their essential
function in tRNA aminoacylation.
Analysis of the Arc1p–MetRS interaction in vitro
and in vivo
Using recombinant proteins in pull-down assays,
we have previously shown that mutations A26R and
A63H in Arc1p and MetRS, respectively, disrupted
the formation of the Arc1p–MetRS complex in vitro
without affecting the Arc1p–GluRS interaction.26 To
extend this analysis, the new mutant proteins shown
in Fig. 3a were overexpressed in E. coli, purified to
homogeneity (data not shown) and used for in vitro
binding using both pull-down assays and SPR
analysis. Concerning MetRS, the results of the pull￾down assay showed that mutation F59A was
detrimental to its in vitro association with Arc1p
(Fig. 6a, lane 2). In the case of Arc1p, mutation S33A
significantly weakened its interaction with MetRS
(Fig. 6a, lane 4) but did not affect the interac￾tion between Arc1p and GluRS (Fig. 6a, lane 7).
These findings are also summarized in Table 2
(for the Arc1p mutants) and Table 3 (for the MetRS
mutants).
These, as well as the previous pull-down assay
results, were validated using SPR in the BIAcore
system. We did not detect a stable Arc1p–MetRS
interaction when wild-type Arc1p was substituted
with the A26R or S33A mutant (Table 2), or when
MetRS was substituted with the F59A or A63H
mutant (Table 3).
Because the in vitro analysis may not accurately
reflect the potential of the mutant proteins for
complex assembly, we also monitored the formation
of the complex in vivo. To do this, PtA-tagged
mutant proteins were purified by IgG-Sepharose
Fig. 4. Genetic analysis of Arc1p point mutants. (a)
Western blot analysis of extracts from cells expressing PtA￾tagged wild-type (lane 1) or point-mutated (lanes 2–7) forms
of Arc1p in the strain arc1− using an anti-PtA antibody.
Equal amounts of extracts were loaded in each lane.
(b) Complementation of the knockout strain arc1−
los1− by
constructs expressing wild-type or point-mutated PtA￾tagged forms of Arc1p, as indicated. Complementation is
shown by the ability to lose the pURA3-Arc1 plasmid and to
grow in the presence of 5-fluoroorotic acid. (–) Transforma￾tion by an empty plasmid.
Fig. 5. Genetic analysis of (a) MetRS and (b) GluRS
point mutants. Upper panels: Extracts from cells expres￾sing PtA-tagged wild-type or point-mutated forms of
MetRS (a; lanes 1–3) and GluRS (b; lanes 1–4) in the strains
mes1− and gus1−
, respectively, were analyzed by Western
blot, using an anti-PtA antibody. Equal amounts of
extracts were loaded in each lane. Lower panels: Com￾plementation of the knockout strains mes1− (a) and gus1−
(b) by constructs expressing wild-type or point-mutated
PtA-tagged MetRS or GluRS, respectively, as indicated. (–)
Transformation by an empty plasmid.
1082 Molecular Dissection of the Arc1p Complexaffinity chromatography from total cell extracts of
yeast cells expressing the corresponding mutants.
This analysis revealed that both MetRS mutations
(F59A and A63H) inhibited the association of MetRS
with Arc1p (Fig. 6b, lanes 2 and 3; Table 3). As
mentioned above, the Arc1p form carrying mutation
A26R could not be expressed in vivo, but Arc1p
mutant S33A, which was expressed, lost its ability to
interact with either endogenous or GFP-tagged
MetRS, while it retained wild-type association levels
with endogenous GluRS (Fig. 6b, lanes 5 and 7;
Table 2). In contrast, the double-mutant form of
Arc1p, A26R R100A, was unable to associate with
either of the two synthetases (Fig. 6b, lane 8; Table 2),
Fig. 6. Mutations of single
amino acids, which are located at
the Arc1p–MetRS interface, disrupt
complex formation both in vitro and
in vivo. (a) Twenty micrograms of
wild-type (lanes 1 and 2) or point￾mutated (lanes 3–7) His-Arc1p was
incubated in a solution with 40 μg
of wild-type (lanes 1 and 3–5) or
point-mutated (lane 2) MetRS or
wild-type GluRS (lanes 6 and 7)
and Ni-NTA-Sepharose beads.
Bound proteins were eluted from
the beads with 200 nM imidazole
and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and
Coomassie staining. (b) Affinity
purification by IgG-Sepharose
chromatography of wild-type
and point-mutated PtA-MetRS ex￾pressed in the mes1− strain (lanes
1–3), or of wild-type and point￾mutated PtA-Arc1p expressed in
the arc1−
los1− (lanes 4 and 5) or the
arc1−
GFP-MetRS (lanes 6–8) strain.
Upper panels: Analysis of column
eluates by SDS-PAGE and Coomas￾sie Blue staining. Lower panels:
Western blot analysis of the eluates
using anti-Arc1p or anti-GFP anti￾bodies, as indicated. Only the rele￾vant parts of the blots are shown.
The numbers on the left corre￾spond to molecular mass markers
(in kDa).
Table 2. Summary of in vitro and in vivo analyses of interactions between wild-type/mutant forms of Arc1p and wild￾type MetRS and GluRS
Arc1p
MetRS GluRS
In vitro In vivo In vitro In vivo
Pull down SPR (Kd; nM) Affinity purification Pull down SPR (Kd; nM) Affinity purification
Wild type + 193 + + 53 +
A26R − − nd + nd nd
S33A +/−− − + nd +
T55R + nd +/− −− −
T55V + nd nd + 152 nd
R100A + nd nd − − nd
Y104A + nd +/− −− −
A26R R100A − nd − − nd −
nd, not determined; (+) strong interaction; (−) no interaction; (+/−) weak interaction.
Molecular Dissection of the Arc1p Complex 1083thus explaining its inability to complement the
synthetic lethal arc1−
los1− strain (Fig. 4b).
Analysis of the Arc1p–GluRS interaction in vitro
and in vivo
Using pull-down assays and recombinant pro￾teins, we have previously reported that mutations
T55R and R100A in Arc1p, as well as mutations
T125R and R164A in GluRS, disrupted the formation
of the Arc1p–GluRS complex in vitro without
detectably affecting the Arc1p–MetRS interaction.26
For comparison purposes, we reproduced the
results here, as shown in Fig. 7a (lanes 2, 5, 6, 8, 11
and 13). The rest of Fig. 7a shows the results of the
pull-down assays with the new GluRS and Arc1p
mutants. Interestingly, substitution of GluRS threo￾nine 125 with valine, instead of arginine (T125V
instead of T125R), left the GluRS–Arc1p complex
unaffected (Fig. 7a, lane 3). Accordingly, substitu￾tion of Arc1p threonine 55 with valine, instead of
arginine (T55V instead of T55R), also did not affect
the formation of the Arc1p–GluRS complex (Fig. 7a,
lane 7). Mutation K157A in GluRS appeared not to
inhibit the in vitro association between GluRS and
Arc1p (Fig. 7a, lane 4). In contrast, mutation Y104A
in Arc1p completely inhibited binding to GluRS in
vitro (Fig. 7a, lane 9), without detectably affecting
binding to MetRS (Fig. 7a, lane 14). The pull-down
assay data are summarized in Table 2 (Arc1p
mutants) and Table 3 (GluRS mutants).
The in vitro interaction data were further validated
using SPR. As shown in Table 3, the GluRS mutants
T125R and R164A gave no detectable interaction
with Arc1p in the BIAcore system, while mutants
T125V and K157A bound to Arc1p, but their binding
affinities were reduced by 3- to 5-fold in comparison
to wild-type GluRS. As predicted by the pull-down
Fig. 7. Mutagenesis of certain
amino acid residues at the Arc1p–
GluRS interface inhibits Arc1p–
GluRS interaction both in vitro and
in vivo. (a) Wild-type (lanes 1–5) or
point-mutated (lanes 6–14) His￾Arc1p was tested for its ability to
interact in vitro with wild-type
GluRS (lanes 6–10) or MetRS (lanes
11–14) or point mutants of GluRS
(lanes 2–5), as described in the
legend to Fig. 6. (b) Affinity purifica￾tion by IgG-Sepharose chroma￾tography of wild-type and point￾mutated PtA-GluRS in the gus1−
strain (lanes 1–4), or of wild-type
and point-mutated PtA-Arc1p in
the arc1−
los1− (lanes 5–7) or the
arc1−
GFP-GluRS (lanes 8–10) strain.
Upper panels: Analysis of column
eluates by SDS-PAGE and Coomas￾sie staining. Lower panels: Western
blot analysis of the eluates using
anti-Arc1p and anti-GFP antibodies,
as indicated. Only the relevant parts
of the blots are shown. The numbers
on the left correspond to molecular
mass markers (in kDa).
Table 3. Summary of in vitro and in vivo analyses of
interactions between wild-type/mutant forms of MetRS
or GluRS and wild-type Arc1p
In vitro In vivo
Pull down SPR (Kd; nM) Affinity purification
MetRS wt + 164 +
MetRS F59A −− −
MetRS A63H −− −
GluRS wt + 53 +
GluRS T125R −− −
GluRS T125V + 179 nd
GluRS K157A + 265 +
GluRS R164A −− −
nd, not determined; (+) strong interaction; (−) no interaction;
(+/−) weak interaction.
1084 Molecular Dissection of the Arc1p Complexassays, immobilized Arc1p mutants T55R, R100A
and Y104A could not detectably associate with
GluRS passing over the biosensor chip (Table 2). In
contrast, the Arc1p mutant T55V bound to GluRS,
albeit with 3-fold-reduced affinity compared to
wild-type Arc1p (Table 2).
Most of these in vitro findings were then evaluated
in vivo using affinity purification of PtA-tagged
mutant or wild-type proteins. This analysis revealed
that the GluRS mutations T125R and R164A, but not
K157A, inhibited the association of GluRS with
Arc1p inside yeast cells (Fig. 7b, lanes 2–4; Table 3).
Arc1p mutations T55R and Y104A also rendered
Arc1p unable to interact with either endogenous or
GFP-tagged GluRS (Fig. 7b, lanes 5–10; Table 2). The
same mutations did not abolish association with
endogenous MetRS, but significantly weakened it.
Formation of the MetRS–Arc1p complex
regulates the subcellular distribution of MetRS
Our previous data have suggested that formation
of the Arc1p–MetRS–GluRS complex regulates the
subcellular distribution of its individual compo￾nents. More precisely, wild-type MetRS, which
forms a complex with Arc1p, was excluded from
the nucleus, while deletion of the MetRS N-terminal
domain and disassembly of the complex allowed the
catalytic core of the synthetase to be located inside
the nucleus.24 Similar results were also obtained for
GluRS, although, in this case, nuclear localization
was weaker and required only partial deletion of its
N-terminal domain. To reassess whether the sub￾cellular distribution of the two enzymes is solely
regulated by their interaction with Arc1p, we tagged
point mutants of MetRS, GluRS and Arc1p with
GFP. Western blot and complementation analyses of
the expression of the GFP-tagged proteins gave
similar results as with the PtA-tagged correspond￾ing mutants shown in Fig. 5 (data not shown). The
cells expressing GFP-tagged mutants were then
examined by confocal laser scanning microscopy.
Wild-type and expressed point mutants of Arc1p
were detected exclusively outside the nucleus (Fig.
8a), in agreement with our previously proposed
model, according to which Arc1p nuclear exclusion
does not depend on its interaction with the synthe￾tases but is due to its active nuclear export through
Xpo1p.25 Mutants of GluRS that lost their apparent
capacity to stably interact with Arc1p were also
detected exclusively in the cytoplasm as in their
wild-type counterpart (Fig. 8b), suggesting that
either these mutants retained some capacity to inter￾act with Arc1p in vivo (albeit to a degree that did not
allow the isolation of stable complexes) or the
subcellular distribution of GluRS was not strictly
regulated by complex formation. Concerning MetRS,
the wild-type form was detected exclusively inside
the cytoplasm, in agreement with our previous
data.24 On the contrary, point-mutated MetRS with￾Fig. 8. Localization of GFP￾tagged point-mutated forms of (a)
Arc1p, (b) GluRS and (c) MetRS in
arc1−
, gus1− and mes1− cells, respec￾tively, by confocal laser scanning
microscopy. On confocal images, in
which sections through roughly the
center of the cells are shown, v
indicates vacuoles and nuclei are
marked by arrows.
Molecular Dissection of the Arc1p Complex 1085out an ability to interact with Arc1p could also be
detected inside the nucleus (Fig. 8c). This shows that
the subcellular distribution of MetRS is dictated
predominantly by complex formation with Arc1p.
Discussion
Previous biochemical,19 genetic24 and structural26
analyses have suggested that the N-terminally
appended domains of MetRS and GluRS interact
with the N-domain of Arc1p. However, it remained
unclear whether the catalytic domains of the synthe￾tases contributed to the interaction with Arc1p.
We have now shown by SPR analysis that the
N-terminal domains of synthetases exhibit a greater
affinity for Arc1p than for the full-length synthe￾tases, suggesting that the catalytic domains of the
synthetases do not take part in complex formation
and may even hinder this process in vitro. Although
one would expect that the binding of full-length
synthetases is more biologically relevant, it is also
possible that the mass transfer restrictions imposed
sterically by the bulky noninteracting domains—
a problem encountered in solid-phase-binding
assays—artificially increase the Kd values of the
full-length enzymes for Arc1p compared to the Kd
values of their isolated interacting N-terminal
domains. Assuming that the hindrance caused by
the catalytic domains is an artifact of the two-phase
system, it is possible that the apparent Kd values
measured for the N-terminal domains (9 nM for
GluRS and 39 nM for MetRS) more precisely reflect
the real affinities of the enzymes for Arc1p when all
proteins are in solution and can freely rotate to
obtain the best binding orientation. These values are
indeed more closely related to those calculated for
the interaction between the noncatalytic and the
catalytic components of the mammalian multisyn￾thetase complex.27
Another issue was whether the binding of one
synthetase to Arc1p affected interaction with the
second. Since no significant difference in affinity was
detected when a preformed binary complex bet￾ween immobilized Arc1p and GluRS was chal￾lenged with MetRS, we suggest an independent
binding of the two synthetases on Arc1p, in agree￾ment with recent structural data.26 This finding
appears to be in contrast to results concerning the
mammalian multisynthetase complex, since binding
of certain components to the scaffold protein p38
was reported to be synergistic.27 Nevertheless,
synergistic interactions in the mammalian complex
are mostly due to cumulative affinities between
more than two components of the complex, instead
of conformational changes in the interacting
components.27 Moreover, proteins comprising the
core of the complex interact nonsynergistically,27 in
agreement with our results in the yeast complex,
which could thus represent an ancient core around
which evolution has formed the more sophisticated
mammalian complex. This hypothesis is further
supported by the fact that the interactions in the
yeast complex are mediated through glutathione-S￾transferase-like structural domains,26 which are also
found in interacting components of the mammalian
complex, such as p38 binding to GluProRS and p18
interaction with MetRS10 (see below and Fig. 9).
A model of the ternary complex between the
N-terminal domains of Arc1p and the synthetases
MetRS and GluRS was recently proposed based on
the crystal structures of two binary subcomplexes.26
To validate this model, we analyzed the effect of
point mutations on binary interactions in vitro and in
a quantitative way using the BIAcore system.
Furthermore, we monitored the effect of these
mutations on ternary complex assembly in vivo,
thus offering a biologically meaningful evaluation of
the structural model. According to this model,
complex formation is predominantly mediated by
Fig. 9. Alignment of (a) yeast (Sc) Arc1p with human (Hs) noncatalytic components of the multisynthetase complex
p18 and p38; of (b) Sc MetRS with Hs MetRS; and of (c) Sc GluRS with Hs GluProRS. Only the relevant parts of the
interacting N-terminal domains are shown. Multiple sequence alignments were calculated with MUSCLE28 using default
program parameters. Identical residues are shown as white characters in a black box. Residues mutated at the Arc1p–
MetRS interface are indicated by arrowheads, and residues mutated at the GluRS–Arc1p interface are indicated by stars.
1086 Molecular Dissection of the Arc1p Complexvan der Waals interactions between nonpolar amino
acid residues.26 In support of this, point mutations of
conserved amino acid residues increasing the size of
side chains, such as Arc1p(A26R), Arc1p(T55R),
MetRS(A63H) and GluRS(T125R), abolished com￾plex formation both in vitro and in vivo. These
mutations apparently disrupt the complementarity
between interacting interfaces and disallow the
formation of van der Waals bonds. In support of
this, two point mutations, Arc1p(T55V) and GluRS
(T125V), which did not dramatically change the size
of the side chain and roughly retained interface
complementarity, allowed the interaction between
Arc1p and GluRS in vitro, even though they reduced
their affinity by about threefold. To investigate the
contribution of hydrogen bonds and salt bridges to
complex formation, we substituted charged or polar
amino acid residues of the interfaces with alanine.
We found that, while mutation Y104A in Arc1p
precluded the interaction with GluRS, mutation
S33A in Arc1p and mutation K157A in GluRS
did not abolish Arc1p–MetRS (at least in vitro) and
Arc1p–GluRS interactions, respectively, even though
they reduced the corresponding affinities. These
results demonstrate that electrostatic forces enhance
the interaction but do not represent the driving force
for complex formation. In contrast, hydrophobic
interactions appear to be more directly involved in
complex formation. Substituting the conserved R100
and R164 residues in Arc1p and GluRS, respectively
(which, according to the structural model, form
stacking interactions), abolished the Arc1p–GluRS
interaction in vitro and in vivo. Along the same line,
participation of MetRS F59 in hydrophobic interac￾tions with Arc1p was shown to be crucial for
complex formation. Finally, the Y104A mutation in
Arc1p may abolish complex assembly because of the
removal of the hydrophobic phenyl ring, rather than
the loss of a hydrogen bond.
Despite the overall agreement between the experi￾mental findings and the predictions of the structural
model, certain discrepancies have to be pointed out.
Deletion of residues 7–32 of Arc1p, which are part of
the interaction interface with MetRS, abolished, as
expected, binding to MetRS, but also significantly
reduced affinity for GluRS, suggesting that the two
binding sites on Arc1p may partially overlap—
something that is not evident in the ternary complex
structural model. It is possible that this deletion
causes inefficient folding and subsequent destabili￾zation of the rest of the Arc1p N-terminal domain,
thus affecting the stability of the interaction with
GluRS. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that
point mutations in Arc1p, which abolish interaction
with MetRS, do not apparently affect binding to
GluRS. On the other hand, point mutations in Arc1p
interrupting the interaction with GluRS apparently
reduce the stability of the in vivo interaction with
MetRS. Because the interface for the GluRS interac￾tion lies more centrally in the Arc1p N-domain, the
substitution of certain residues located at this
interface could affect the overall folding and
stability of the whole Arc1p N-domain, thus low￾ering the affinity for MetRS. It becomes evident that
structural data have to be combined with in vivo
experimentation in order to characterize the binding
properties of a wild-type or mutant protein. In sum￾mary, the role of individual amino acid residues in
the assembly of a synthetase complex was assessed
in vivo for the first time. Several of these amino
acid residues are conserved in the corresponding
glutathione-S-transferase-like structural domains
of the catalytic or noncatalytic components of the
mammalian multisynthetase complex, as shown by
sequence alignments between yeast and related
human proteins (Fig. 9). This justifies their targeting
also in mammalian cells in order to understand the
molecular basis of the assembly and, subsequently,
the function of the multisynthetase complex of
higher eukaryotes.
We have previously suggested that the subcellular
distribution of MetRS, and probably of GluRS, is
dictated by complex formation with Arc1p.24 The
availability of synthetase point mutants lacking the
ability to bind to Arc1p in vivo allowed us to test this
hypothesis more vigorously. Confocal microscopy
analysis showed that, at least in the case of MetRS,
lack of association with Arc1p was correlated with
the appearance of a nuclear pool of the enzyme,
suggesting that monomeric MetRS can be imported
into the nucleus by the use of a so far unidentified
nuclear localization sequence (NLS). We have
recently shown that Arc1p is actively exported
from the nucleus in an Xpo1p-dependent way.25 It
is therefore likely that the steady-state cytoplasmic
localization of wild-type MetRS is the end result of a
dynamic process involving nuclear import of free
MetRS and efficient nuclear export of the MetRS–
Arc1p complex. Why should MetRS enter the
nucleus at all? In higher eukaryotes, minor pools of
synthetases have been detected inside the nucleus.14
These nuclear pools are thought to be necessary for
the aminoacylation of newly synthesized tRNAs
as a precondition for their nuclear export.11 Human
MetRS has additionally been suggested to play
a nuclear role in regulating rRNA synthesis.16
Data from the yeast system also point to a link
between nuclear tRNA aminoacylation and tRNA
transport.29 A synthetic lethal relationship between
Arc1p and the yeast nuclear tRNA export receptor
Los1p exists.17,23 Inhibition of aminoacylation leads
to accumulation of mature tRNAs inside the yeast
nucleus.15,30–32 Furthermore, overexpression of
yeast MetRS suppresses the nuclear export defect
of tRNAMet in the absence of yeast tRNA exportin
Los1p.33 Therefore, the presence of MetRS inside the
nucleus may serve the aminoacylation and efficient
nuclear export of its cognate tRNA. Another
appealing possibility is that the Arc1p–MetRS
complex contributes directly to the transport of its
cognate tRNAMet by physically carrying it out of the
nucleus. Investigation of the tRNA export in yeast
strains lacking LOS1 and expressing the complex￾dissociating point mutants of Arc1p or MetRS could
test the direct or indirect participation of the Arc1p–
MetRS complex in tRNA nuclear export.
Molecular Dissection of the Arc1p Complex 1087The subcellular distribution of GluRS appears to
be more complicated in respect to its regulation by
complex assembly. More specifically, while the full￾length protein was excluded from the nucleus, a
deletion mutant lacking part of its N-terminal
domain and interaction with Arc1p was also
detected inside the nucleus.24 In agreement, lack of
Arc1p also led to the distribution of GluRS to both
nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments. Inexplic￾ably, however, a deletion mutant of GluRS missing
the whole N-terminal domain was relocalized
exclusively in the cytoplasm.24 Analysis of the
localization of GluRS point mutants in this study
did not solve this puzzle and suggested that
disruption of the complex does not affect the
localization of full-length GluRS. One possibility is
that GluRS, like Arc1p, can determine its localiza￾tion by independent means, which are not directly
related to complex formation with Arc1p. However,
these means may be affected by the mere presence of
Arc1p in the cell. As already mentioned, Arc1p
becomes essential for yeast cell viability when the
tRNA exportin Los1p is missing.17 We have shown
here that a double mutant of Arc1p, which interacts
with neither MetRS nor GluRS, cannot complement
the synthetic lethal arc1−
los1− strain, while interac￾tion with either one of the two synthetases allows
these cells to grow. Therefore, cells that lack Los1p
and subsequently suffer a tRNA export defect
require the presence of a complex between Arc1p
and at least one synthetase. Probably, association
between Arc1p and a synthetase is advantageous in
both ways: It favors the function of the synthetase in
terms of catalysis, and it also supports the possible
role of Arc1p in tRNA transport.
Materials and Methods
Yeast strains, media and plasmids
The following previously described plasmids were used:
pET8c-His6-Arc1p, pET8c-His6-Arc1p-ΔN(7–122),18
pRS315-PNOP1-PtA, pRS315-PNOP1-GFP,23 pASZ11-PNOP1-
GFP-Arc1-ΔN1(Δ7–32), pRS315-PNOP1-GFP-MetRS,
pRS315-PNOP1-GFP-GluRS,24 pETm-Arc1p, pETm-MetRS,
pETm-MetRS-N, pETm-GluRS and pETm-GluRS-N.26 The
yeast strains arc1−
, arc1−
los1−
, mes1−
, arc1−
mes1−
, gus1− and
arc1−
gus1− have been described previously.17,24 The strains
arc1−
GFP-MetRS and arc1−
GFP-GluRS were constructed
by the transformation of arc1−
mes1− and arc1−
gus1−
strains with pRS315-PNOP1-GFP-MetRS and pRS315-
PNOP1-GFP-GluRS, respectively. Yeast cells were grown
in rich YPD medium or synthetic SDC medium contain￾ing the necessary amino acids and nutrients. For
counterselection of cells containing URA3 plasmids, 5-
fluoroorotic acid (Toronto Research Chem.) was used at
1 μg/ml.
Protein expression and purification
The purification of recombinant epitope (His6)-tagged
Arc1p and Arc1p deletion mutants; wild-type and point￾mutated Arc1p, MetRS and GluRS; and MetRS and GluRS
deletion mutants from E. coli cells was performed as
described previously.17,18,26,34,35
Mutagenesis and construction of plasmids
Single-amino-acid substitution mutants of Arc1p,
MetRS and GluRS were constructed using as template
wild-type genes cloned into a modified pETm (Novagen)
vector,26 with the QuikChange® II Site-Directed Muta￾genesis Kit (Stratagene) and suitable oligonucleotides, the
sequence of which is available upon request. The DNA
sequence of the point mutants was confirmed by the
sequencing performed at the Genomics Core Facility of
the European Molecular Biology Laboratory (Heidelberg,
Germany). Point-mutated Arc1p and GluRS, as well as
wild-type Arc1p open reading frames (ORFs), were
amplified and provided with PstI restriction sites at
both ends by PCR and then subcloned into pRS315-
PNOP1-PtA and pRS315-PNOP1-GFP vectors. The part of
MetRS sequence containing mutated amino acid residues
was excised from pETm-MetRS (NcoI/StuI) and then
subcloned into pRS315-PNOP1-PtA-MetRS vector, repla￾cing wild-type sequence. Mutated MetRS ORF was
excised and subcloned into pRS315-PNOP1-GFP vector.
pET8c-His6-Arc1-ΔN1(Δ7–32) was constructed as fol￾lows: Part of the truncated Arc1p ORF coding for the
sequence between amino acid residue 32 (site of deletion)
and a corresponding HpaI site inside the C-domain of
Arc1p was excised from pASZ11-PNOP1-GFP-Arc1-ΔN1
(Δ7–32) (XhoI/HpaI) and subcloned into pET8c-His6-
Arc1-ΔN1(Δ7–122), replacing part of another truncated
Arc1p ORF starting from amino acid residue 122 (site of
deletion).
In vitro interaction analysis
An interaction analysis of mutated and wild-type
Arc1p, MetRS and GluRS was performed by Ni-NTA￾Sepharose affinity chromatography using as bait His6-
tagged wild-type or mutated Arc1p with untagged wild￾type or mutated MetRS or GluRS as prey proteins. Ni￾NTA-Sepharose beads (QIAGEN) were washed and
equilibrated in HBS buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 7.4,
150 mM NaCl). Twenty microliters of Ni-NTA-Sepharose
beads was mixed with 20 μg of bait protein (Arc1p) and
40 μg of prey protein (MetRS or GluRS) in 500 μl of HBS
buffer (final volume) and incubated at 4 °C for 1 h.
Nonspecifically bound protein was removed by washing
with 3 × 1 ml HBS buffer+ 20 mM imidazole, and proteins
were eluted with 100 μl of HBS buffer + 200 mM imidazole.
The protein content of column eluates was analyzed by
SDS-PAGE and Coomassie staining.
Biosensor experiments
SPR measurements were carried out using a BIAcore
(BIACORE AB, Uppsala, Sweden) instrument, essentially
as previously described.36 In brief, a biosensor chip (CM-5;
BIACORE AB) was used to immobilize Arc1p, using an
amine coupling kit (BIACORE AB). A separate surface
was similarly coupled with Arc1-ΔN protein, which
served as a control. All interactions were carried out in
20 mM Hepes (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM ethylene￾diaminetetraacetic acid and 0.005% Tween 20. Varying
concentrations of the different ligand proteins in the above
buffer (1–2000 nM) were injected over the two surfaces at a
flow rate of 20 μl/min at 25 °C, and the response at
1088 Molecular Dissection of the Arc1p Complexequilibrium was recorded. The response from the control
surface was subtracted and the data were plotted as
resonance units versus ligand–protein concentration. The
equilibrium dissociation constant Kd was calculated by
fitting the data to the equation, R=RmaxC/(Kd +C), where
R is the response at equilibrium, Rmax is the maximum
response level and C is the concentration of the protein.
Data from the simultaneous binding of MetRS and GluRS
to the Arc1p chip were fitted to the equation, R=Rmax1C/
(Kd1+C)+Rmax2C/(Kd2+C), which assumes the presence
of two independent binding sites.
Isothermal titration calorimetry
ITC measurements were carried out using a VP-ITC
microcalorimeter from MicroCal, Inc. All experiments
were conducted at 20 °C. Sample cell and syringe proteins
were diluted to a final concentration of 5 μM and 50 μM,
respectively, with storage buffer (20 mM Hepes, 150 mM
NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2 and 10% glycerol). GluRS was applied
to the sample cell containing Arc1p with 17 repeated
injections of 15 μl each at 5-min intervals. The final result
was an average of three independent experiments.
Experimental data were analyzed with Origin software.
Miscellaneous procedures
Affinity purification of PtA fusion proteins was
performed essentially as described previously.17,18
Expression of the fusion proteins transformed in yeast
cells, as well as copurification of untagged proteins in PtA
affinity purification eluates, was analyzed by a Western
blot of whole-cell extracts or column eluates, respectively,
using polyclonal antibodies against the GFP moiety,
rabbit PAP (Dako), to detect the PtA tag or antibodies
against Arc1p.17 Confocal laser scanning microscopy was
performed using a Zeiss LSM510 FCS confocal micro￾scope. The images shown in Fig. 8 correspond to sections
that are approximately in the middle of the cells. Protein
concentrations were determined using the Protein Assay
reagent from Bio-Rad. SDS-PAGE and DNA manipula￾tions (restriction digestions, PCR amplifications, and
others) were performed in accordance with standard
protocols.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank the other members of our
laboratory and Dr. E. Paraskeva (Laboratory of
Physiology, University of Thessaly) for their useful
comments and suggestions. Part of this work was
supported by a grant from the Greek Ministry of
Education (IRAKLEITOS in the context of the
European-Union-funded EPEAEK II program) to
G.S. and by a European Molecular Biology Organi￾zation (EMBO) short-term fellowship to E.K.
Supplementary Data
Supplementary data associated with this article
can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/
j.jmb.2007.10.010
References
1. Ibba, M. & Soll, D. (2000). Aminoacyl-tRNA synthesis.
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69, 617–650.
2. Wang, C. C., Morales, A. J. & Schimmel, P. (2000).
Functional redundancy in the nonspecific RNA bind￾ing domain of a class I tRNA synthetase. J. Biol. Chem.
275, 17180–17186.
3. Cahuzac, B., Berthonneau, E., Birlirakis, N., Guittet, E.
& Mirande, M. (2000). A recurrent RNA-binding
domain is appended to eukaryotic aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases. EMBO J. 19, 445–452.
4. Frugier, M., Moulinier, L. & Giege, R. (2000). A
domain in the N-terminal extension of class IIb
eukaryotic aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases is important
for tRNA binding. EMBO J. 19, 2371–2380.
5. Ryckelynck, M., Giege, R. & Frugier, M. (2003). Yeast
tRNA(Asp) charging accuracy is threatened by the
N-terminal extension of aspartyl-tRNA synthetase.
J. Biol. Chem. 278, 9683–9690.
6. Francin, M., Kaminska, M., Kerjan, P. & Mirande, M.
(2002). The N-terminal domain of mammalian lysyl￾tRNA synthetase is a functional tRNA-binding do￾main. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 1762–1769.
7. Francin, M. & Mirande, M. (2003). Functional
dissection of the eukaryotic-specific tRNA-interacting
factor of lysyl-tRNA synthetase. J. Biol. Chem. 278,
1472–1479.
8. Rho, S. B., Kim, M. J., Lee, J. S., Seol, W., Motegi, H.,
Kim, S. & Shiba, K. (1999). Genetic dissection of
protein–protein interactions in multi-tRNA synthetase
complex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 96, 4488–4493.
9. Agou, F. & Mirande, M. (1997). Aspartyl-tRNA
synthetase from rat: in vitro functional analysis of its
assembly into the multisynthetase complex. Eur. J.
Biochem. 243, 259–267.
10. Quevillon, S., Robinson, J. C., Berthonneau, E.,
Siatecka, M. & Mirande, M. (1999). Macromolecular
assemblage of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases: identifi￾cation of protein–protein interactions and character￾ization of a core protein. J. Mol. Biol. 285, 183–195.
11. Lund, E. & Dahlberg, J. E. (1998). Proofreading and
aminoacylation of tRNAs before export from the
nucleus. Science, 282, 2082–2085.
12. Simos, G. & Hurt, E. (1999). Transfer RNA biogenesis:
a visa to leave the nucleus. Curr. Biol. 9, R238–R241.
13. Grosshans, H., Simos, G. & Hurt, E. (2000). Review:
Transport of tRNA out of the nucleus—direct chan￾neling to the ribosome? J. Struct. Biol. 129, 288–294.
14. Nathanson, L. & Deutscher, M. P. (2000). Active
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases are present in nuclei as
a high molecular weight multienzyme complex. J. Biol.
Chem. 275, 31559–31562.
15. Azad, A. K., Stanford, D. R., Sarkar, S. & Hopper, A. K.
(2001). Role of nuclear pools of aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases in tRNA nuclear export. Mol. Biol. Cell,
12, 1381–1392.
16. Ko, Y. G., Kang, Y. S., Kim, E. K., Park, S. G. & Kim, S.
(2000). Nucleolar localization of human methionyl￾tRNA synthetase and its role in ribosomal RNA
synthesis. J. Cell Biol. 149, 567–574.
17. Simos, G., Segref, A., Fasiolo, F., Hellmuth, K.,
Shevchenko, A., Mann, M. & Hurt, E. C. (1996). The
yeast protein Arc1p binds to tRNA and functions as a
cofactor for the methionyl- and glutamyl-tRNA
synthetases. EMBO J. 15, 5437–5448.
18. Simos, G., Sauer, A., Fasiolo, F. & Hurt, E. C. (1998). A
conserved domain within Arc1p delivers tRNA to
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Mol. Cell, 1, 235–242.
Molecular Dissection of the Arc1p Complex 108919. Deinert, K., Fasiolo, F., Hurt, E. C. & Simos, G. (2001).
Arc1p organizes the yeast aminoacyl-tRNA synthe￾tase complex and stabilizes its interaction with the
cognate tRNAs. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 6000–6008.
20. Graindorge, J. S., Senger, B., Tritch, D., Simos, G. &
Fasiolo, F. (2005). Role of Arc1p in the modulation of
yeast glutamyl-tRNA synthetase activity. Biochemistry,
44, 1344–1352.
21. Morales, A. J., Swairjo, M. A. & Schimmel, P. (1999).
Structure-specific tRNA-binding protein from the
extreme thermophile Aquifex aeolicus. EMBO J. 18,
3475–3483.
22. Kaminska, M., Deniziak, M., Kerjan, P., Barciszewski,
J. & Mirande, M. (2000). A recurrent general RNA
binding domain appended to plant methionyl-tRNA
synthetase acts as a cis-acting cofactor for aminoacyla￾tion. EMBO J. 19, 6908–6917.
23. Hellmuth, K., Lau, D. M., Bischoff, F. R., Kunzler, M.,
Hurt, E. & Simos, G. (1998). Yeast Los1p has proper￾ties of an exportin-like nucleocytoplasmic transport
factor for tRNA. Mol. Cell. Biol. 18, 6374–6386.
24. Galani, K., Grosshans, H., Deinert, K., Hurt, E. C. &
Simos, G. (2001). The intracellular location of two
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases depends on complex
formation with Arc1p. EMBO J. 20, 6889–6898.
25. Galani, K., Hurt, E. & Simos, G. (2005). The tRNA
aminoacylation co-factor Arc1p is excluded from the
nucleus by an Xpo1p-dependent mechanism. FEBS
Lett. 579, 969–975.
26. Simader, H., Hothorn, M., Kohler, C., Basquin, J.,
Simos, G. & Suck, D. (2006). Structural basis of
yeast aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase complex forma￾tion revealed by crystal structures of two binary
sub-complexes. Nucleic Acids Res. 34, 3968–3979.
27. Robinson, J. C., Kerjan, P. & Mirande, M. (2000).
Macromolecular assemblage of aminoacyl-tRNA syn￾thetases: quantitative analysis of protein–protein
interactions and mechanism of complex assembly.
J. Mol. Biol. 304, 983–994.
28. Edgar, R. C. (2004). MUSCLE: multiple sequence
alignment with high accuracy and high throughput.
Nucleic Acids Res. 32, 1792–1797.
29. Simos, G., Grosshans, H. & Hurt, E. (2002). Nuclear
export of tRNA. Results Probl. Cell Differ. 35, 115–131.
30. Sarkar, S., Azad, A. K. & Hopper, A. K. (1999). Nuclear
tRNA aminoacylation and its role in nuclear export of
endogenous tRNAs in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 96, 14366–14371.
31. Grosshans, H., Hurt, E. & Simos, G. (2000). An
aminoacylation-dependent nuclear tRNA export
pathway in yeast. Genes Dev. 14, 830–840.
32. Steiner-Mosonyi, M. & Mangroo, D. (2004). The nuclear
tRNA aminoacylation-dependent pathway may be the
principal route used to export tRNA from the nucleus in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biochem. J. 378, 809–816.
33. Feng, W. & Hopper, A. K. (2002). A Los1p-indepen￾dent pathway for nuclear export of intronless tRNAs
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA.
99, 5412–5417.
34. Simader, H., Hothorn, M. & Suck, D. (2006). Structures
of the interacting domains from yeast glutamyl-tRNA
synthetase and tRNA-aminoacylation and nuclear￾export cofactor Arc1p reveal a novel function for an
old fold. Acta Crystallogr. Sect. D, 62, 1510–1519.
35. Simader, H. & Suck, D. (2006). Expression, puri￾fication, crystallization and preliminary phasing of
the heteromerization domain of the tRNA-export
and aminoacylation cofactor Arc1p from yeast. Acta
Crystallogr. Sect. F, 62, 346–349.
36. Jonsson, U., Fagerstam, L., Ivarsson, B., Johnsson, B.,
Karlsson, R., Lundh, K. et al. (1991). Real-time
biospecific interaction analysis using surface plasmon
resonance and a sensor chip technology. Biotechniques,
11, 620–627.
1090 Molecular Dissection of the Arc1p Complex