Structure Analysis of Bone Morphogenetic Protein-2 Type I
Receptor Complexes Reveals a Mechanism of Receptor
Inactivation in Juvenile Polyposis Syndrome*□S
Received for publication, July 23, 2007, and in revised form, December 19, 2007 Published, JBC Papers in Press, December 26, 2007, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M706029200
Alexander Kotzsch‡
, Joachim Nickel§
, Axel Seher§
, Kai Heinecke§
, Laura van Geersdaele§
, Thomas Herrmann¶
,
Walter Sebald§
, and Thomas D. Mueller‡1
From the ‡
Lehrstuhl fu¨r Botanik I-Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie und Biophysik, Julius-von-Sachs-Institut der Universita¨t
Wu¨rzburg, Julius-von-Sachs-Platz 2, D-97082 Wu¨rzburg, Germany, §
Lehrstuhl fu¨r Physiologische Chemie II, Theodor-Boveri Institut
fu¨r Biowissenschaften (Biozentrum) der Universita¨t Wu¨rzburg, Am Hubland, D-97074 Wu¨rzburg, Germany, ¶
Institut fu¨r Virologie
und Immunbiologie, Versbacherstrasse 7, D-97070 Wu¨rzburg, Germany, and 
Rudolf-Virchow Zentrum (Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft-Forschungszentrum) der Universita¨t Wu¨rzburg, Versbacher Strasse 9, D-97070 Wu¨rzburg, Germany
Bone morphogenetic proteins regulate many developmental
processes during embryogenesis as well as tissue homeostasis in
the adult. Signaling of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) is
accomplished by binding to two types of serine/threonine kinase
transmembrane receptors termed type I and type II. Because a
large number of ligands signal through a limited number of recep￾tors, ligand-receptor interaction in the BMP superfamily is highly
promiscuous, with a ligand binding to various receptors and a
receptor binding many different BMP ligands. In this study we
investigate the interaction of BMP-2 with its two high affinity type
I receptors, BMP receptors IA (BMPR-IA) and BMPR-IB. Interest￾ingly, 50% of the residues in the BMP-2 binding epitope of the
BMPR-IA receptor are exchanged in BMPR-IB without a decrease
in binding affinity or specificity for BMP-2. Our structural and
functional analyses show that promiscuous binding of BMP-2 to
both type I receptors is achieved by inherent backbone and side￾chain flexibility as well as by variable hydration of theligand-recep￾tor interface enabling the BMP-2 surface to adapt to different
receptor geometries. Despite the high degree of amino acid varia￾bility found in BMPR-IA and BMPR-IB binding equally to BMP-2,
three single point missense mutations in the ectodomain of
BMPR-IA cannot be tolerated. In juvenile polyposis syndrome
these mutations have been shown to inactivate BMPR-IA. On the
basis of our biochemical and biophysical analyses, we can show that
the mutations, which are located outside the ligand binding
epitope, alter the local or global fold of the receptor, thereby inac￾tivating BMPR-IA and causing a loss of the BMP-2 tumor suppres￾sor function in colon epithelial cells.
Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs)2 form a subgroup
within the transforming growth factor- superfamily of cyto￾kines that are related by structure and function (1, 2). Members
of the BMP subfamily play crucial roles throughout embryonic
development as well as tissue and organ homeostasis in the
adult (3, 4). BMP-2, a member of this superfamily, is widely
known from its ectopic bone formation properties (4, 5), but it is
also involved in the regulation of angiogenesis (6), gastrulation (7),
neurogenesis (8), chondrogenesis (9), and apoptosis (10).
Receptor activation by the BMP ligand is accomplished by
binding and oligomerization of two types of serine/threonine
kinase receptors, termed type I and type II. Transphosphoryla￾tion of the intracellular receptor domains results in phospho￾rylation of downstream signaling molecules, e.g. SMAD pro￾teins, which then activate gene transcription. BMP-2 binds the
type I receptors BMPR-IA and -IB with high affinity and ActR-I
with lower affinity (4, 11–13). BMPR-IA and -IB can both be
utilized in BMP-2-mediated cellular signaling processes (11,
14). Although BMPR-IA is ubiquitously expressed and is indis￾pensable during development (15), inactivation of BMPR-IB
results in a less severe phenotype, and its expression seems
spatially restricted (4). Other ligands have been identified to
also bind to these two BMP type I receptors, i.e. BMP-4 (4),
GDF-5 (16), BMP-6 (17), and BMP-7 (18), indicating a high
degree of binding promiscuity and/or combinatorial signaling
in this system (19).
These ligands should, therefore, have common structural
elements that allow them to bind to the same receptor as well as
unique features allowing for discriminative recognition
between different cognate receptors. In GDF-5, type I receptor
specificity depends on a single residue; substitution of Arg-57
for Ala results in a loss of discriminatory binding capabilities of
* This project was supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft Grants
MU1095/1-1 and SFB 487 TP B1 and B2. The costs of publication of this
article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article
must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18
U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact. □S The on-line version of this article (available at http://www.jbc.org) contains
supplemental. Figs. S1–S5 and Tables S1–S4.
The atomic coordinates and structure factors (code 2QJB, 2QJ9, and 2QJA)
have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank, Research Collaboratory for
Structural Bioinformatics, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ
(http://www.rcsb.org/). 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed: Dept. of Molecular Plant
Physiology and Biophysics, University of Wuerzburg, Julius-von-Sachs
Platz 2, 97082 Wuerzburg, Germany. Tel.: 49-931-8886146; Fax: 49-931-
8886158; E-mail: mueller@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de.
2 The abbreviations used are: BMP, bone morphogenetic protein; GDF,
growth and differentiationfactor; BMPR-IA, BMP type IA receptor; BMPR-IB,
BMP type IB receptor; BMPR-IA/IBC
, BMP type IA/IB receptor chimera;
BMPR-II, BMP type II receptor; ActR-I, activin type I receptor; ActR-IB, activin
type IB receptor; ec, extracellular domain; JPS, juvenile polyposis syn￾drome; CFP, cyan fluorescing protein; CAGA, activin/transforming growth
factor- responsive firefly luciferase transporter p(CAGA)12-Luc; BRE, BMP￾responsive firefly luciferase transporter; IC50, concentration required for
50% inhibition; FACS, fluorescence-activated cell sorter; SMAD, small
mothers against decapentaplegic.
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOL. 283, NO. 9, pp. 5876 –5887, February 29, 2008
© 2008 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc. Printed in the U.S.A.
5876 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 283•NUMBER 9•FEBRUARY 29, 2008
 by guest on February 22, 2015 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from GDF-5 for BMPR-IB and -IA (20). In BMP-2 alanine occupies
this exact position, possibly explaining the promiscuous bind￾ing to both type I receptors. The loss of type I receptor speci￾ficity of human GDF-5 R57L leads to the disease symphalang￾ism characterized by the fusion of the interphalangeal joints
(21). This finding clearly indicates that GDF-5-induced skeletal
malformation can result not only from loss in receptor binding
but also from loss in receptor specificity.
Several diseases have been linked to mutations occurring in
the genes encoding for BMP ligands or receptors. In primary
pulmonary hypertension, inactivating mutations have been
observed for the BMP type II receptor (22, 23), loss or gain of
function mutations in GDF-5 and BMPR-IB are linked to skel￾etal malformations (24, 25), and activating mutations in ActR-I
probably cause fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (26).
Recently, missense mutations in the BMPR1A gene were linked
to juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS), an autosomal dominant
disease characterized by excessive colorectal polyp growth giv￾ing predisposition for colorectal cancer (27, 28). Formation of
ectopic crypts in JPS has been correlated with a loss in BMP
signaling. Concordantly, inactivating mutations in as well as
knock-out of SMAD4 can also lead to JPS (27, 29) due to a
similar loss in the regulation of epithelial cell proliferation and
apoptosis. Thus, BMP-2, via signaling through BMPR-IA,
exhibits a tumor suppressor function in epithelial cells (30).
Whereas the loss of BMP signaling in JPS can easily be
explained for nonsense mutations in BMPR-IA, the mechanism
of inactivation of the known missense mutations in the extra￾cellular BMP-2 binding domain of BMPR-IA is not understood
due to their location outside the ligand binding epitope.
In this study we present a structural and functional study of
how ligand-receptor promiscuity for the BMP-2 type I receptor
interaction is encoded on a molecular level. Structural analysis
of a complex of BMP-2 bound to a BMPR-IB mimic indicates
that limited specificity for type I receptor recognition is due to
structural plasticity in the receptor as well as in the ligand bind￾ing epitope. In vitro and cell-based analyses of BMPR-IA vari￾ants with missense mutations in the extracellular part leading
to JPS reveal that these mutations result in a loss of structural
integrity despite the structural plasticity/flexibility of BMPR-IA
found in our comparison of different BMP-2 type I receptor
complexes.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Protein Preparation—The ectodomains of BMPR-IA and
variants thereof were expressed as thioredoxin fusion proteins
and are purified as described (31). Protein homogeneity was
analyzed by high performance liquid chromatography, SDS￾PAGE, and mass spectrometry. For preparation of ligand-re￾ceptor complexes, BMP-2 was dissolved in water, and a 2.1-fold
excess of the receptor protein in the same volume of 20 mM
Hepes, pH 7.4, 1.4 M NaCl was added. The protein complex was
concentrated and applied to gel filtration for the removal of
excess of receptor protein.
Crystallization and Structure Determination—For crystalli￾zation, protein concentration of the ligand-receptor complexes
was adjusted to 8 mg ml1
. Crystals of the various complexes
grew from 0.7 to 0.9 M potassium/sodium phosphate, pH 7.8 to
8.2, 25% ethylene glycol and appeared after 5 days. Datasets
were acquired at the beamline PX14.1 at BESSY (Berlin) or on a
home source (Rigaku MicroMax007 with VariMax optics) at
100 K. Data were processed with the software CrystalClear
(Rigaku). Complex structures were determined employing
molecular replacement using the software Phaser and the
structure of BMP-2BMPR-IA (PDB code 1REW) as template.
Structures were refined with Refmac Version 5.02, and manual
rebuilding was performed using the XBuild module of the soft￾ware package Quanta2006 (Accelrys). Data collection and
refinement statistics are outlined in supplemental Table 4.
Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy—Circular dichroism spec￾tra were acquired on a Jasco J-715 spectrophotometer. Spectra
were recorded from 185 to 240 nm using 30 scans, a scanning
speed of 200 nm min1
, and a 1-nm bandwidth. Receptor pro￾teins were dissolved in 10 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.2,
and the protein concentration was adjusted to 0.1 mg ml1
. The
mean residue ellipticity [] was determined from the measured
ellipticity  by application of []   100/(c  d  NA), with
c being the molar concentration, d being the path length, and
NA being the number of amino acids in the protein. Thermal
denaturation data were acquired using a Jasco J-810 spectrom￾eter. Proteins were heated from 20 to 96 °C at a rate of 2 °C
min1
. Scans from 185 to 240 nm were acquired at 5 °C tem￾perature increments. After heating to 96 °C, the protein was
cooled down to 20 °C at a rate of 16 °C/min, and a spectrum
was measured to test for refolding. The melting temperature
(Tm) was determined from the wavelength showing a maximum
difference between the folded and unfolded state.
Interaction Analysis—Biosensor-based interaction analysis
was performed as described previously (20, 31). Receptor
ectodomains or BMP-2 were biotinylated and immobilized on a
streptavidin-coated CM5 sensor chip. BMP-2 or soluble
ectodomains were perfused over the sensor chip using six dif￾ferent analyte concentrations. The sensorgrams were evaluated
using the software BIAevaluation 2.4. Bulk face effects were
corrected by subtracting a control flow cell (FC1) from all sen￾sorgrams. Dissociation constants were obtained from the
kinetic rate constants for complex formation (kon) and dissoci￾ation (koff). Mean values with a S.D. of 30% for koff and 15% for
kon were deduced from 6–12 independent measurements.
SMAD2/3 Luciferase Reporter-Gene Assays—BMP type I-ac￾tivin type IB receptor chimeras, which have the extracellular
domain of the BMP type I receptor (BMPR-IA, BMPR-IB,
BMPR-IA/IBC, BMPR-IA-P34R, BMPR-IA-Y39D, BMPR-IA￾T55I) and the transmembrane helix and intracellular kinase
domain of ActR-IB were constructed to measure BMP-2-in￾duced signals uncoupled from endogenous BMP receptors. For
transient transfections, HEK293TSA cells were seeded in
24-well poly-(L)-lysine-coated plates (Greiner) at a density of
1.5  105 cells/well. The cells were cotransfected with 50
ng/well pSV -gal (Promega), 100 ng/well p(CAGA)12-Luc
reporter plasmid, and 50–100 ng/well of the pcDNA3.1 plas￾mids encoding for the different BMP type I receptors using
HEKfectin (Bio-Rad). After 24 h cells were treated with 5 or 10
nM BMP-2 in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium containing
0.1% fetal calf serum. -Galactosidase activity was measured by
o-nitrophenyl galactopyranoside conversion at 405 nm. Lucif￾Mechanisms in BMP Type I Receptor Recognition
FEBRUARY 29, 2008•VOLUME 283•NUMBER 9 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 5877
 by guest on February 22, 2015 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from             erase activity was determined using the Promega luciferase
assay kit. All assays were performed twice with each experiment
performed in duplicate.
BMPR-IA Competition Assay in C3H10T1/2 Cells—
C3H10T1/2 cells stably transfected with the BRE-luciferase
reporter construct were seeded in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s
medium at a density of 3  104 cells cm2
. After 16 h the
medium was exchanged, and the cells were stimulated with 5
nM BMP-2 plus increasing concentrations of BMPR-IA, BMPR￾IB, BMPR-IA/IBC, and BMPR-IA variants (log 2 dilutions start￾ing from 1 M) for 72 h. Cells were lysed, and luciferase activity
was determined as described above. Each experiment was per￾formed twice, and all assays were performed in duplicate.
BMP-2 Induced Inhibition of MPC11 Cell Proliferation—
MPC11 cells (ATCC CCL167) were seeded in Dulbecco’s modi￾fied Eagle’s medium in 96-well plates at a density of 2.5  103
cells/well. For inhibition of cell proliferation 5 nM BMP2 (IC50  5
nM) was added. For competition, increasing concentrations of
the receptor ectodomains (2 nM to 1 M) were added. After 72 h
10 l of [3
H]thymidine (0.25 Ci, Amersham Biosciences) was
added to each well. The cells were immobilized after 24 h on
fiber mats (Scatron), and the thymidine incorporation was
determined using a -counter. All assays were performed in
duplicate, and the experiments were repeated twice.
Cellular Localization of BMPR-IA Variants—Full-length
wild type BMPR-IA and the BMPR-IA mutants P34R, Y39D,
and T55I were cloned into pcDNA3.1 with CFP fused to the C
terminus of the intracellular kinase domain and transiently
transfected into HEK293TSA cells using Polyfect (Qiagen). As a
control for plasma membrane staining, enhanced yellow fluo￾rescing protein with the palmitylation sequence of the Lyn
kinase fused to its N terminus was co-transfected. 24 h after
transfection cells were transferred to a poly-(L)-lysine-coated
glass slide. Cell nuclei were stained by incubation with Hoechst
33343 and analyzed using a Leica SP2 confocal microscope at
630-fold magnification. For excitation of the fluorophores,
wavelengths of 350 nm (Hoechst 33343), 436 nm (CFP), and
490 nm (yellow fluorescent protein) were used. Emission was
recorded at 450 nm (Hoechst 33343), 476 nm (CFP), and 535
nm (yellow fluorescent protein). Individual images were ana￾lyzed with Leica confocal software (Leica) and merged using the
software package ImageJ.
For fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis 2 
105 HEK293TSA cells were transiently transfected with
pcDNA3.1 harboring full-length wild type or mutant BMPR-IA
with an N-terminal FLAG tag. The transfected cells were incu￾bated in FACS buffer (phosphate-buffered saline, 0.1% bovine
serum albumin, 0.05% NaN3) supplemented with mouse anti￾FLAG M2 monoclonal antibody (1:200, Sigma) or the same
amount of an isotype-specific control antibody (mouse IgG1,
clone R73) for 1 h. Cells were washed with FACS buffer and
incubated with phycoerythrin-labeled donkey anti-mouse IgG
(1:500, Dianova) for 30 min. After another washing, step cells
were analyzed on a FACScan flow cytometer (BD Biosciences).
Data analysis was performed using the software CellQuest. Liv￾ing cells were electronically gated according to their light scat￾ter characteristics, which have been determined by counter￾staining with propidium iodide.
Coordinate Deposition—The atomic coordinates and struc￾ture factors for the structures of the complex of BMP-2BMPR￾IA/IBC, BMP-2BMPR-IA_B1, and BMP-2BMPR-IA_B12 have
been deposited with the Protein Data Bank (accession codes
2QJB, 2QJ9 and 2QJA, respectively).
RESULTS
The BMPR-IA/IBC Chimeric Variant Represents a BMPR-IB
Mimic—We have created a BMP receptor variant that has the
ligand binding epitope formed by the amino acids of BMPR-IB
but has a BMPR-IA scaffold (Fig. 1) because crystals of the com￾plex of BMP-2 and BMPR-IBec suitable for structure determi￾nation could not be obtained despite great efforts. The equilib￾rium binding constants for the interaction of BMP-2 with either
BMPR-IA or -IB differ only slightly; however, analyses of the
binding kinetics reveal clear differences for the binding to both
receptors (Table 1). BMP-2 binding to BMPR-IB reproducibly
shows a 2–3-fold increased dissociation rate, whereas the asso￾ciation kinetic is almost unaffected. Thus, the parameters for
binding kinetics were used to judge whether a variant exhibits
BMPR-IA- or BMPR-IB-like binding character.
Exchange of residues Lys-88 to Thr-98 in BMPR-IA, located
in the loop between helix 1 and -strand 5, results in the var￾iant BMPR-IA_B1, which already exhibits the same binding
parameters for BMP-2 as observed for BMPR-IB. The addi￾tional exchange of residues Ala-74 to Tyr-80 located in
-strand 4 (BMPR-IA_B12) reverts the binding characteristics
seen for the precursor variant BMPR-IA_B1. A BMPR-IA-like
binding characteristic was then observed for all further BMPR￾IA/-IB chimeras until all residues in the binding epitope were
exchanged for those of BMPR-IB (Fig. 1, a and b). Consistently,
all binding parameters of this chimera BMPR-IA/IBC to GDF-5
(20) and BMP-2 are indistinguishable from those of wild type
BMPR-IB (Table 1).
In Vivo Signaling of BMPR-IA, BMPR-IB, and the Chimera
BMPR-IA/IBC Are Similar—Cell-based assays were used to
evaluate binding and signaling properties of BMPR-IA/IBC.
C3H10T1/2 cells stably transfected with the BRE-luciferase
reporter construct were used to determine inhibition of BMP-2
signaling by the application of type I receptor ectodomain pro￾teins. All receptor ectodomain proteins, BMPR-IAec, BMPR￾IBec, and BMPR-IA/IBCec, exhibit a concentration-dependent
inhibition of BMP-2-induced SMAD1/5/8 signaling by com￾peting with the endogenous receptors for BMP-2 binding (Fig.
2a). The IC50 value of BMPR-IAec is below 500 nM, whereas
that of BMPR-IBec and BMPR-IA/IBCec is 500 nM or slightly
higher.
To measure how BMPR-IB and BMPR-IA/IBC signal upon
BMP-2 binding, we implemented a different luciferase-based
reporter-gene assay in HEK293T cells. BMP-2-induced signal￾ing by endogenous receptors was uncoupled from the cellular
readout by fusing the extracellular part of BMPR-IA, BMPR-IB,
or BMPR-IA/IBC to the transmembrane part and kinase
domain of ActR-IB. Upon BMP-2 activation these BMPR￾ActR-IB receptor chimeras signal via the SMAD2/3 pathway,
which does not occur naturally. This assay clearly shows that
BMP-2 not only binds to BMPR-IA, BMPR-IB, and BMPR-IA/
Mechanisms in BMP Type I Receptor Recognition
5878 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 283•NUMBER 9•FEBRUARY 29, 2008
 by guest on February 22, 2015 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from        IBC but also led to signaling activities of a similar magnitude in
our setup (Fig. 2b).
In summary, BMPR-IA and BMPR-IB bind BMP-2 with sim￾ilar affinities, but different binding kinetics indicate differences
in the binding mechanism. The newly designed receptor chi￾mera BMPR-IA/IBC, which shares the binding epitope of
BMPR-IB, exhibits binding and signaling capabilities indistin￾guishable from that of wild type BMPR-IB and, thus, can be
used as a BMPR-IB mimic in structural and functional studies.
Structural Plasticity in the BMP-2 Type I Receptor Complex—
We analyzed the structure of the complex of BMP-2 bound to
the BMPR-IB mimic BMPR-IA/IBC and compared it to that of
the BMP-2BMPR-IAec complex (32). The asymmetric unit
contains a full complex consisting of the BMP-2 dimer and two
BMPR-IA/IBCec molecules (Fig. 3, a and b). The complex
structures of BMP-2BMPR-IAec and BMP-2BMPR-IA/IBCec
are highly similar (root mean square deviation  0.8 Å), indi￾cating that the overall complex architecture is unchanged (sup￾FIGURE 1. Construction of BMPR-IA/BMPR-IB chimeras. a, sequence alignment of the extracellular domains of BMPR-IA, BMPR-IB, and the chimeric
variants. For constructing the BMPR-IA/BMPR-IB chimeras, amino acid residues in the BMP-2 binding epitope of BMPR-IA were exchanged blockwise as
indicated by different colors. Structural analyses of the type I receptor-BMP-2 complexes were performed with receptor chimeras BMPR-IA_B1, BMPR￾IA_B12, and BMPR-IA/IBC
. The latter variant has all residues in contact with BMP-2 upon complex formation (marked by asterisks) exchanged for the
respective amino acid in BMPR-IB and, thus, exhibits binding properties identical to wild type BMPR-IB. b, surface representation of BMPR-IA with the
blockwise exchanges indicated in different colors (left panel). The binding epitope of BMPR-IA (middle) and BMPR-IA/IBC (right) is color-coded by amino acid
type (hydrophobic in gray, polar in green, acidic in red, and basic in blue) with the contact residues presented in darker colors.
TABLE 1
Binding affinities of BMPR-IA/BMPR-IB chimeras to BMP-2
Biosensor analysis employing immobilized receptor ectodomain proteins.
Receptor
protein
Association
rate kon
Dissociation
rate koff
Dissociation binding
constant KD
105 M1 s
1 104 s
1 nM
BMPR-IA 3.4 2.4 0.7
BMPR-IA_B1 4.0 9.7 2.4
BMPR-IA_B12 3.0 3.4 1.1
BMPR-IA/IBC 2.8 11.1 4.9
BMPR-IB 2.5 7.0 2.7
Mechanisms in BMP Type I Receptor Recognition
FEBRUARY 29, 2008•VOLUME 283•NUMBER 9 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 5879
 by guest on February 22, 2015 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from    plemental Fig. 1). The receptor ectodomain positions within
the complex structure are identical for both type I receptors
BMPR-IA and BMPR-IA/IBC (root mean square deviation 0.4 Å
for C of receptor ectodomain without peripheral loops),
showing that despite the 18 amino acid exchanges in the ligand
binding epitopes, no displacement of the receptor in the wrist
epitope is required to adapt the ligand BMP-2 to the different
receptor surfaces (Fig. 1b). Thus, a possible explanation for the
promiscuity in receptor binding might be in a slight structural
variation within the receptor and ligand binding sites to allow
binding and recognition of different receptors or ligands.
The main binding determinants established in the complex
BMP-2BMPR-IAec (31, 32) are absolutely conserved in both
BMP-2BMPR-IAec and BMP-2BMPR-IA/IBCec complexes.
The three central hydrogen bonds (H-bonds) formed between
Leu-51 NH (BMP-2) and Gln-86 O 2 (BMPR-IA, BMPR-IA/
IBC) and the Asp-53 NH (BMP-2) and Cys-77 CO (BMPR-IA,
BMPR-IA/IBC) are identical in length and angular parameters
between the two complex structures (supplemental Table 1).
This observation corroborates with our mutagenesis studies
showing that mutation of Leu-51 in BMP-2 decreases the bind￾ing affinity to either BMPR-IA or
BMPR-IB in a similar manner (32).
Previously, we proposed that the
water molecules buried in the inter￾face of BMP-2 and BMPR-IA play
an important role in the recognition
of the type I receptors and might be
required to adapt to altered surface
geometries of different type I recep￾tors (32). Indeed, three of the four
water molecules located in the
interface nearby Leu-51 of BMP-2
are conserved between both com￾plexes BMP-2BMPR-IAec and
BMP-2BMPR-IA/IBCec, forming
an identical H-bond network
between ligand and receptor. How￾ever another water molecule, which
is buried in a cleft between residues
Phe-49, Leu-51, Ile-62, and Leu-66
of BMP-2 and Gln-86 of BMPR-IA
is absent in the BMP-2BMPR-IA/
IBCec complex. The larger side
chain of Met-62 (instead Ile-62 as
in BMPR-IA) in BMPR-IA/IBC
requires more space, thereby filling
and precluding the solvent molecule
from the cleft. In all other amino
acid exchanges, larger side chains
closely adapt side chain conforma￾tions that follow those of the smaller
ones, thereby leaving the overall
architecture and packing density
unaltered.
In summary, the type I receptor
interface of BMP-2 and possibly of
other BMPs as well seems to have a
built-in adaptability enabling limited specificity for the ligand￾receptor interaction. The adaptability is based on a highly
conserved polar hot spot of binding formed between two
pairs of residues, Leu-51 and Asp-53 of BMP-2 and con￾served Gln and Cys residues in the receptors BMPR-IA and
BMPR-IB. The H-bonds between these residues contribute a
large part to the binding free energy, whereas residues at the
periphery of the epitope contribute only little and, thus, can
be mutated without loss in affinity.
Water molecules in the core of the ligand-receptor interface
modulate the packing density thereby allowing larger side
chains of different receptors to be accommodated by preclud￾ing one or more of the solvent molecules from the interface.
This mechanism seems to allow a high variability in the amino
acid composition of the BMP-receptor interface, with almost
50% of the BMP receptor residues in the interface differing
between BMPR-IA and BMPR-IB.
BMPR-IA/IBC Exhibits Two Conformations When in Com￾plex with BMP-2—In the complex of BMP-2BMPR-IA/
IBCec, 18 direct H-bonds are present (supplemental Table 1).
Compared with the complex of BMP-2 bound to BMPR￾FIGURE 2. Signaling properties of BMPR-IA, BMPR-IB, and BMPR-IA/IBC in cell assays. a, inhibition of BMP-2
induced BRE reporter-activity in C3H10T1/2 cells by the addition of recombinant receptor ectodomain pro￾teins. The lower BMP-2 binding affinities of the BMPR-IB and BMPR-IA/IBC proteins are reflected in slightly lower
inhibition efficiencies. The black bar designates the stimulation by 5 nM BMP-2, and the gray barrepresents BRE
reporter activity in unstimulated cells. b, SMAD activation through BMPR-IA, BMPR-IB, and BMPR-IA/IBC
-activin
receptor type IB chimeras. cDNA of BMP type I-ActR-IB receptor chimeras were transfected into HEK293 cells,
and expression of luciferase activity upon BMP stimulation was determined. The expression of luciferase activ￾ity for the three type I receptor constructs is expressed in -fold induction. A negative control without transfec￾tion of a BMP type I-ActR-IB receptor chimera is indicated (CAGA). RLU, relative luciferase units.
FIGURE 3. Ribbon view of the complex BMP-2BMPR-IA/IBC
. a, the complex of BMP-2 bound to BMPR-IB
mimetic BMPR-IA/IBC in ribbon representation viewed from the side. The extracellular domain of BMPR-IA/IBC
is shown in blue, and the BMP-2 dimer is colored in green. The 2-fold symmetry axis is indicated. b, the binary
complex viewed from the top. The intermolecular central disulfide bond in the BMP-2 dimer is shown, and
secondary structure elements are marked. The BMPR-IA/IBC binding loop, which exists in two different confor￾mations, is shown in red.
Mechanisms in BMP Type I Receptor Recognition
5880 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 283•NUMBER 9•FEBRUARY 29, 2008
 by guest on February 22, 2015 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from         IAec, two H-bonds are lost, possibly explaining the slightly
decreased binding affinity. Closer examination reveals, how￾ever, that the two interfaces of the BMP-2, at least with
respect to the H-bond network, are quite asymmetric (sup￾plemental Tables 1 and 2). In one wrist epitope, 12 H-bonds
are formed between BMP-2 and BMPR-IA/IBCec, whereas in
the second, only six H-bonds exist (supplemental Table 2).
The latter are conserved between both interfaces of the
BMP-2BMPR-IA/IBCec complex and, thus, possibly mark
the minimal set of H-bonds in the BMP-type I receptor inter￾face. Of these six H-bonds, five are also observed in the com￾plex BMP-2BMPR-IAec. However, in the BMP-2BMPR￾IAec complex, both interfaces are symmetrical, with 10
H-bonds in each epitope (32).
Superposition of both ligand-receptor interfaces reveals that
BMPR-IA/IBCec exists in two conformations in this complex
(Fig. 4). Loop 5 between  -helix 1 and -strand 5 (Arg-88 to
Arg-96) deviates in the two BMPR-IA/IBC molecules in the
complex with the largest C-C
distance of 4 Å for Asp-89. How￾ever, not only the positions of back￾bone atoms differ, also the side
chains of several residues within this
loop show markedly different orien￾tations. The side chain of residue
Asp-89, involved in an intramolecu￾lar salt bridge with Arg-97, moves
by more than 5 Å with concurrent
loss of the salt bridge. Similarly, the
side chain of BMPR-IA/IBC Arg-96
is rotated (distance between N of
both Arg-96 conformations 7Å)
such that the salt bridge between
Arg-96 and Glu-65 is lost. This loss
of both salt bridges in one BMPR￾IA/IBC conformer results in an
“open” loop conformation, whereas
the “closed” form of loop 5 closely
resembles the conformation ob￾served in BMPR-IA in the BMP￾2BMPR-IAec complex (Fig. 4, a and
b). The loop in the open conforma￾tion seems more flexible with the
temperature factors of the C
atoms of Arg-88 to Arg-96 in the
BMPR-IA/IBC open conformer
being about 20–30Å2 higher com￾pared with those in the closed con￾formation (supplemental Fig. 2). As
a consequence of main and side
chain reorientations in this loop,
four intermolecular H-bonds are
lost in the interaction of BMP-2
with the open conformer of BMPR￾IA/IBC. Also, the shielding of the
H-bond network between the main
binding determinants from the sol￾vent seems less efficient, providing
another explanation for the reduced binding affinity of BMP-2
for BMPR-IB.
The molecular cause of the loop reorientation seems due to
the exchange of Ala93 in BMPR-IA to proline. Albeit the back￾bone torsion angles of Ala93 in BMPR-IA and Pro-93 in BMPR￾IA/IBC are almost identical and differ by less than 10°, the larger
side chain of the proline residue pushes against Arg-97 located
just above. Consequently, the intramolecular salt bridge
between Asp-89 and Arg-97 in BMPR-IA/IBC is destabilized
(Fig. 4c). In one of the two conformers of BMPR-IA/IBC, the
side chain of Asp-89 swings out into the bulk solvent. The
backbone torsion angles of Asp-89 change dramatically, with
the -torsion angle differing by nearly 180° and the 	-torsion
angle changing by more than 70°. The torsion angles of the
residues Asp-89 and Pro-93 also differ between both BMPR￾IA/IBC conformers, thereby adjusting the loop conformation
to leave the positions of the “anchor points,” Arg-88 and
His-94, unaltered.
FIGURE 4. Two conformations exist for the BMPR-IA/IBC binding loop 5. Superposition of the loop 1 of
BMPR-IA marked in red (from the structure of BMP-2BMPR-IA, pdb code 1REW) and BMPR-IA/IBC (shown in dark
and light blue) from both interfaces, with the closed conformational state (a) and the open conformation (b).
The closed conformation in a closely resembles the loop conformation also observed for BMPR-IA in complex
with BMP-2. c, open (light blue) and closed (dark blue) conformations of loop 5 superimposed onto each other
(stereo image). In the open conformation the salt bridge between Asp-89 and Arg-97 is disrupted, and the side
chain of Asp-89 swings out into the solvent, making an H-bond interaction with the backbone carbonyl of
Ile-99.
Mechanisms in BMP Type I Receptor Recognition
FEBRUARY 29, 2008•VOLUME 283•NUMBER 9 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 5881
 by guest on February 22, 2015 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from      In the structures of two “intermediate” BMPR-IA/BMPR-IB
chimeras (BMPR-IA_B1 and BMPR-IA_B12) bound to BMP-2,
the loop conformation for the loop 5 is identical to that of the
BMP-2BMPR-IA/IBC, clearly indicating that the different con￾formations are directly and solely induced by the amino acids
exchanges in loop 5. In conclusion, amino acid differences
between BMPR-IA and BMPR-IB possibly lead to an increased
flexibility on side and main chain level in BMPR-IB. The
BMPR-IB like receptor chimera BMPR-IA/IBC exists in two
conformations in the BMP-2 receptor complex, leading to a
variable number of H-bonds between ligand and receptor. The
lower net number of intermolecular H-bonds and the more
dynamic ligand-receptor interface probably account for the
increased dissociation rate and the lower affinity of BMP-2 and
BMPR-IA/IBC. Although we do not have direct structural data
of wild type BMPR-IB, measurements of the folding stability of
BMPR-IB employing a thermal melting analysis using circular
dichroism spectroscopy show that the extracellular domain of
BMPR-IB has a melting temperature that is 5 °C lower than
BMPR-IA (data not shown). This possibly suggests a lower sta￾bility and higher flexibility of BMPR-IB ectodomain in compar￾ison to BMPR-IA and correlates with the structural flexibility
observed for the BMPR-IB mimic BMPR-IA/IBC.
Missense Mutations in BMPR-IA Outside the Ligand Binding
Epitope Lead to JPS—Our structure analysis of the different
BMP type I receptor complexes suggests that the type I recep￾tors BMPR-IA and -IB share a common structural scaffold but
residues in the ligand binding epitope are variable for modulat￾ing ligand specificity. In the case of BMP-2, both type I recep￾tors BMPR-IA and -IB are bound with similar affinity. A com￾parison of the structures of BMPR-IA and the BMPR-IB mimic
BMPR-IA/IBC shows that differences in the amino acid com￾position of the epitope are compensated by backbone and side
chain flexibility as well as solvent molecules modulating the
interface packing. The sequence variability in the ligand-recep￾tor interface seems, however, restricted to amino acids that
neither constitute main binding determinants nor are required
for structural integrity of the receptor. A hot spot of binding
such as Gln-86 of BMPR-IA is also preserved in BMPR-IB, as is
Phe-85 or Cys-77. Mutation of any of these residues, thus,
results in a significant loss of binding affinity.
Non-sense mutations in BMPR-IA, which result basically in a
knock-out of BMPR-IA through destruction of the BMPR-IA￾fold, have been reported in the juvenile polyposis syndrome,
which is characterized by excessive colorectal polyp growth and
often leads to colon cancer (27). Similarly, inactivating muta￾tions in SMAD4 also result in JPS (33). The common mecha￾nism of all these mutations seems to be the loss of BMP-2/-4
activity required to inhibit proliferation in the colon epithelial
cells (27).
Interestingly, three missense mutations in the extracellular
ligand binding domain of BMPR-IA (P34R, Y39D, and T55I)
have been reported in JPS previously. These are neither main
binding determinants nor constitute residues located inside the
hydrophobic core but nevertheless seem to inactivate BMP-2
signaling. Two mutations, P34R and Y39D, are located outside
the BMP binding epitope at the protein surface (Fig. 5, a and b).
Only residue Thr-55 of BMPR-IA, which is affected in JPS via
the mutation T55I, is in direct contact with BMP-2. However,
BMPR-IA Thr-55 is located at the interface periphery sharing
minimal surface in the contact. In addition, the H-bond of
Thr-55 of BMPR-IA to Asp-53 O
2 of BMP-2 does not contrib￾ute to the binding affinity of the BMP-2BMPR-IA interaction
(32), and modeling of the mutation T55I does not reveal a steric
hindrance for the interaction. Using the structural data pro￾vided in this study and of the complexes BMP-2BMPR-IA, no
mechanism can be proposed for how these mutations might
result in a loss of BMP-2 receptor activation.
We prepared all three BMPR-IA variants and determined
their BMP-2 binding properties in vitro by biosensor interac￾tion analysis (Table 2). Whereas variant BMPR-IA-P34R shows
a less than 2-fold decrease in binding affinity, the other variants,
Y39D and T55I, exhibit a drastically reduced binding to BMP-2.
With the receptor proteins immobilized onto the biosensor
surface no binding could be detected up to a concentration of
80 nM BMP-2, indicating a dissociation constant larger than 1
M. In a second experiment the ligand BMP-2 was immobilized
on the sensor surface. Using this setup, BMPR-IA-Y39D and
BMPR-IA-T55I exhibit dissociation constants of 1.5 and
2.6 M, respectively, whereas wild type BMPR-IA binds
BMP-2 with high affinity of about 30 nM. We also tested these
variants in cell-based assays (Fig. 5, c and d). C3H10T1/2 cells
stably transfected with a BRE-luciferase reporter-gene con￾struct were stimulated with 5 nM BMP-2. The BMP-2-induced
luciferase expression activation was then inhibited by adding
increasing concentrations of recombinant receptor ectodo￾main proteins with wild type BMPR-IA exhibiting an IC50 value
of about 0.5 M (Fig. 5c). In contrast, BMPR-IA-P34R shows an
increased IC50 of 4 M, and BMP-2 activation can only be
suppressed to 50% at the highest concentration tested (Fig. 5c).
In comparison, BMPR-IA-Y39D and BMPR-IA-T55I did not
inhibit BMP-2-induced SMAD signaling even at high concen￾trations (Fig. 5c).
Effects of BMP-2 signaling on cell proliferation were tested
using the mouse plasmacytoma cell line MPC11, which stops
proliferating upon stimulation with members of the transform￾ing growth factor- superfamily like activin (34) and BMP-2
(Fig. 5d). By stimulation with 5 nM BMP-2, cell proliferation is
decreased to 50%. Again, receptor ectodomain proteins of
BMPR-IA, BMPR-IB, or BMPR-IA/IBC reverse the BMP-2
effect in a dose-dependent manner. The addition of wild type
BMPR-IA fully rescues the BMP-2-induced decrease in prolif￾eration, with about 125 nM BMPR-IA being necessary for 50%
rescue. In comparison, BMPR-IA-P34R is less efficient (IC50 
4 M) and even at high concentrations normal proliferation
cannot be restored (data not shown). The BMPR-IA mutants
Y39D and T55I are unable to rescue the BMP-2-induced anti￾proliferative effect, similar to the inhibition of the BMP-2-in￾duced SMAD signaling reported above. Testing the direct sig￾naling capabilities via the BMPR-IA-ActR-IB receptor
chimeras showed that both BMPR-IA-Y39D and BMPR-IA￾T55I are completely inactive, whereas BMPR-IA-P34R exhibits
about 30% of wild type BMPR-IA activity (supplemental Fig. 3),
which is consistent with results of the inhibition and prolifera￾tion assays using recombinant receptor ectodomains (Fig. 5, c
and d).
Mechanisms in BMP Type I Receptor Recognition
5882 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 283•NUMBER 9•FEBRUARY 29, 2008
 by guest on February 22, 2015 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from    JPS Mutations Result in Unfolding of BMPR-IA—Although
the in vitro measurements of the BMPR-IA variants P34R,
Y39D, and T55I show that the variants are binding-deficient to
BMP-2 to a variable degree, a molecular mechanism how these
mutations cause their effect cannot be given. Analyses of the
BIAcore data, however, showed the association kinetics being
strongly affected, indicating that the mutations might affect the
fold of BMPR-IA (Table 2). We, thus, used circular dichroism
(CD) spectroscopy to determine possible changes in the three￾dimensional structures of the BMPR-IA variants (Fig. 6a). The
CD spectrum of BMPR-IA-P34R is similar to wild type BMPR￾IA, suggesting that its structure is largely conserved. In con￾trast, the CD spectra of variants Y39D and T55I deviate clearly
from wild type BMPR-IA, and a simulation of the CD-spectra
FIGURE 5. Mutations in the extracellular domain of BMPR-IA involved in JPS. a, three missense mutations in the extracellular domain of BMPR-IA are
described as resulting in juvenile polyposis syndrome. The receptor BMPR-IA is shown as an orange surface presentation with the mutations highlighted in
different colors. The bound BMP-2 is indicated as a magenta ribbon. Two of the mutations, P34R (yellow) and Y39D (blue), are located outside the BMP-2 binding
epitope, having no contact with the bound ligand. The third mutation T55I (green) is close but in the periphery of the binding epitope. b, as in a but rotated 45°
around the y axis. c, competition of BMP-2 activation of the BRE luciferase reporter by the addition of recombinant BMPR-IA ectodomain protein or variant
proteins. d, rescue of BMP-2-mediated inhibition of proliferation of MPC11 cells. The addition of 5 nM BMP-2 reduces the proliferation to 50%; recombinant
BMPR-IA proteins (wild type or variant) were added to determine competition efficiencies. e– g, magnification of the BMPR-IA region around the three residues
affected in JPS: Y39D (e), T55I (f), and P34R (g). Residues are represented by sticks and colored by protein identity (BMPR-IA: cyan, C; blue, N; red, O; BMP-2: green,
C). Residues P34R, Y39D, and T55I are shown in yellow, and hydrogen bonds are shown as dashed lines.
Mechanisms in BMP Type I Receptor Recognition
FEBRUARY 29, 2008•VOLUME 283•NUMBER 9 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 5883
 by guest on February 22, 2015 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from indicates an increase in random coil structures. We, therefore,
performed thermal denaturation analyses using CD spectros￾copy (Fig. 6b). Wild type BMPR-IA unfolds at 68 °C with a nar￾row transition characteristic for a stably folded globular pro￾tein. BMPR-IA-P34R unfolds at almost the same Tm (65 °C);
however, the folded/unfolded transition is less sharp. Most
interestingly, the two variants Y39D and T55I do not show any
folded/unfolded transition. Thus, the BMP-2 binding defi￾ciency of the latter two variants is clearly due to the loss of the
BMPR-IA fold.
Because expression in eukaryotic cells might yield natively
folded BMPR-IA variants due to involvement of chaperones, we
tested whether the BMPR-IA and the JPS variants are trans￾ported to the cell surface. BMPR-IA and the JPS variants were
expressed as full-length receptor proteins with CFP fused to
their C terminus of the kinase domain. Enhanced yellow fluo￾rescing protein with a palmitylation sequence fused to its N
terminus was used to stain the cell membrane. For wild type
BMPR-IA and all BMPR-IA variants, P34R, Y39D, and T55I,
colocalization of the receptor-protein and the membrane￾marker is observed (Fig. 7, a– d), suggesting proper transloca￾tion to the cell surface. To ensure correct membrane integra￾tion of the receptor variants, we performed FACS analysis
showing that all mutant receptor proteins are indeed trans￾ported to the cell surface and integrated into the membrane.
HEK293TSA cells expressing wild type BMPR-IA or the vari￾ants carrying an N-terminal FLAG tag that is accessible from
the extracellular space can be sorted for phycoerythrin fluores￾cence, whereas mock-transfected cells cannot be addressed
(Fig. 7e). Surface expression levels of the mutant receptors are
comparable with those of wild type BMPR-IA. Thus, unfolding
of the Y39D and T55I variants does not affect transport to the
cell surface.
DISCUSSION
In this study we present a mechanism by which the promis￾cuous binding of BMP-2 to its high affinity type I receptors can
be explained. Promiscuous binding of BMP-2 to both type I
receptors BMPR-IA and -IB seems to rely on three major
points. First, the majority of the binding free energy is main￾tained through conservation of just three H-bonds in the center
of both BMP-2 type I receptor interactions with BMPR-IA and
-IB. The peripheral interactions contribute little to binding
affinity but are necessary to shield the polar bonds in the center
from solvent access and are, thus, variable. Second, “built-in”
water molecules in the interface core allow exchange of amino
acids in the epitope as long as the residue type is retained. Dif￾ferent side chains sizes and geometries can be adapted via
FIGURE 6.Missensemutations Y39D and T55I in BMPR-IA result in unfolded proteins.CD spectroscopy of the receptor ectodomain proteins shows that the
BMPR-IA fold is affected in the variants Y39D and T55I. a, CD spectra of wild type BMPR-IA (black) and the JPS mutants P34R (red), Y39D (blue), and T55I (green)
are superimposed. b, thermal denaturation studies using CD spectroscopy of BMPR-IA and variants reveals that wild type BMPR-IA and variant P34R unfold at
similar temperatures indicating a similar stable, globular fold for both proteins. In contrast, BMPR-IA variants Y39D and T55I show no change in their CD spectra
when heated to 95 °C, suggesting the absence of a globular fold for these two variants.
TABLE 2
Binding affinities of BMPR-IA variants in juvenile polyposis
syndrome
Biosensor analysis employing immobilized
receptor ectodomain proteins
Receptor protein
(immobilized)
Association
rate kon
Dissociation
rate koff
Dissociation binding
constant KD
a
105 M1 s
1 104 s
1 nM
BMPR-IA 3.4 2.4 0.7
BMPR-IA-P34R 3.5 3.2 0.9
BMPR-IA-Y39D NDb ND NBc
BMPR-IA-T55I ND ND NB
BMPR-IB 2.5 7.0 2.7
Biosensor analysis employing immobilized BMP-2
Receptor protein
(analyte)d
Association
rate kon
Dissociation
rate koff
Dissociation binding
constant KD
a
104 M1 s
1 103 s
1 nM
BMPR-IA 5.6 1.7 30
BMPR-IA-P34R 4.4 1.4 32
BMPR-IA-Y39D 0.17 2.5 1470
BMPR-IA-T55I 0.28 7.2 2570
a Dissociation binding constant KD was derived from calculating KD  koff
kon
.
b ND, kinetics could not be determined due to very fast dissociation rates.
c NB, no binding; due to the inability of acquiring the kinetic rate constants, the
binding affinity can only be estimated to be 1 M. d Dissociation binding constant KD (eq) was obtained from a setup with the ligand
BMP-2 immobilized on the biosensor surface. This setup yields binding affinities
for the so-called 1:1 interaction, which does not include avidity effects of the
dimeric BMP-2.
Mechanisms in BMP Type I Receptor Recognition
5884 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 283•NUMBER 9•FEBRUARY 29, 2008
 by guest on February 22, 2015 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from exclusion of one or more of these interface water molecules.
Third, inherent backbone and side-chain flexibility of interface
residues attached onto a common scaffold allows different side￾chain geometries to be adapted without major loss of interac￾tion energy. Although the increased flexibility in the BMP-2
binding loop of BMPR-IA/IBC results in a loss of intermolecular
H-bonds, their contribution to binding of BMP-2 is only mar￾ginal, and the overall binding affinity is, therefore, almost
unaltered.
Similar mechanisms have been observed for other protein￾protein interactions, e.g. TRAF3 (35, 36), and the require￾ment of flexibility for promiscuous binding has been pro￾posed previously (37, 38). Structure analysis revealed that
BMP and activin type II receptor ectodomains also exhibit
inherent flexibility (39, 40). Specifically the BMPR-II recep￾tor is highly flexible with almost all of its loops being disor￾dered in the free state (41). The activin type II receptors are
less flexible; however, several loops undergo conformational
changes of the backbone upon ligand binding to adapt to the
ligand surface (39, 42).
It is, therefore, surprising that, although various mutations in
the ligand binding epitope of BMPR-IA can be accommodated
without loss of BMP-2 affinity, several missense mutations in
the ectodomain of BMPR-IA have been reported that lead to a
loss of BMP-2 signaling activity resulting in the juvenile polyp￾osis syndrome. Nonsense mutations like premature stop
codons or mutations of structurally relevant cysteines can be
easily explained; however, the three mutations described
seemed not disruptive, and two, P34R and Y39D, are not even
located within the binding interface. Our data, however, clearly
confirm that all three mutations lead to a loss of BMP-2 binding
or signaling activity, although to a variable degree (supplemen￾tal Fig. 3). The two mutations with the strongest decrease in
BMP-2 binding, Y39D and T55I, result in complete unfolding of
the BMPR-IA ectodomain.
Interestingly, Tyr-39 is also mutated in BMPR-IB, and the
exchange does not result in a loss in BMP-2 binding affinity. To
explain this apparent discrepancy, the location of Tyr-39 in a
small crevice between the loop 1 and the 310-helix of the mem￾brane-proximal C terminus must be taken into account. The
aromatic ring is placed above the peptide bond between Tyr-39
and Cys-40, possibly forming a stabilizing - stacking inter￾action (Fig. 5e). In BMPR-IB Tyr-39 is replaced by a lysine res￾idue, suggesting that possibly a hydrophobic amino acid of a
certain size may be required to stabilize the loop 1. A mutagen￾esis series for Tyr-39 with different amino acids (Phe, Ile, Lys,
and Ala) supports this hypothesis (supplemental Fig. 4 and
Table 3). If Asp replaces Tyr-39, the side-chain carboxylate
group might form unfavorable H-bonds with residues within
the loop 1 or destabilize the loop conformation in the folded
state such that the majority of the receptor protein is unfolded.
For BMPR-IA-T55I we also found that the receptor protein is
unfolded in vitro. Although a mechanism explaining the
unfolding of this particular mutant is not as obvious, analysis of
the structures of the complexes BMP-2BMPR-IA and BMPR￾2BMPR-IA/IBC shows that the conserved Thr-55 makes an
intramolecular H-bond stabilizing the loop conformation of
loop 2 (Fig. 5f). Exchange of the threonine residue with an iso￾leucine first removes the H-bond, and second, the larger side
chain of the isoleucine requires a particular side-chain torsion
angle conformation to fit. These restraints possibly destabilize
the receptor protein during folding, causing the unfolding of
the receptor ectodomain similar to the Y39D mutation.
In contrast, it seems unfolding of the ectodomain is not the
mechanism by which the mutation P34R causes decreased
BMP-2 signaling. Our cell-based and in vitro studies suggest
that, if folding is affected, only minor local changes are intro￾duced. Binding affinity in the BIAcore studies is only marginally
decreased. However, competition studies in cell-based experi￾ments confirm that similar to the BMPR-IA/IBC chimera
BMPR-IA-P34R cannot completely inhibit BMP-2 signaling in
contrast to wild type BMPR-IA. Pro-34 is located at the N ter￾minus of BMPR-IA with around 40% of the residue being sol￾vent accessible (Fig. 5g). Continuous electron density is
observed for Pro-34, indicating an ordered structure for this
N-terminal stretch. Although residue Thr-55, which is crucial
FIGURE 7. BMPR-IA variants are transported to and integrated in to the
cell membrane. HEK293TSA cells were transfected with full-length BMPR-IA,
BMPR-IA-P34R, BMPR-IA-Y39D, or BMPR-IA-T55I (30 ng of plasmid DNA).
BMPR-IA constructs were conjugated to an N-terminal FLAG tag and a C-ter￾minal CFP fusion. The cell membrane is stained with an enhanced yellow
fluorescing protein carrying a palmytilation sequence at the N terminus for
translocation at the intracellular membrane. Cell nuclei were stained with
Hoechst 33343. Wild type BMPR-IA (a) and the mutants P34R (b), Y39D (c), and
T55I (d) are efficiently transported to the cell membrane. e, we further used an
anti-FLAG antibody to verify that the extracellular domains of BMPR-IA and
variants P34R, Y39D, and T55I appear at the cell surface. Cells were incubated
with a primary anti-FLAG antibody and a secondary phycoerythrin-conju￾gated antibody and sorted according to phycoerythrin fluorescence. Trans￾fected cells (thick line) can clearly be separated from control cells (thin line),
showing that BMPR-IA mutant proteins are correctly inserted into the cell
membrane. Mock-transfected cells cannot be separated. The change in the
mean fluorescence intensity of the low-expressing population was as follows
for transfected cells: 68 (P34R), 44 (Y39D), 54 (T55I), 51 (wild type (wt)), and 21
(mock). The respective values for the isotype-specific control were between
16 and 18. The proportion of cells stained with high intensity by FLAG-specific
antibody was 3% for the mock-transfected cells and between 24% (wild type)
and 35% (BMPR-IA-P34R) for the receptor-transfected cells, demonstrating
that expression of mutants was at least as good as that of the wild type
receptor.
Mechanisms in BMP Type I Receptor Recognition
FEBRUARY 29, 2008•VOLUME 283•NUMBER 9 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 5885
 by guest on February 22, 2015 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from   for correct folding, is in close proximity to Pro-34, structural
changes at the Thr-55 site due to the mutation P34R seem not
to cause the effects observed in the cell-based assays since this
would lead to a decrease in BMP-2 affinity. Thus, we can only
speculate how the BMPR-IA mutation P34R leads to the
decreased activity (supplemental Fig. 3). One possibility is a
reduced stability of the mutant protein in vivo. The introduc￾tion of an arginine at position 34 would create an additional
proteolytic cleavage site for trypsin-like proteases. In vitro
experiments with N-terminal-truncated BMPR-IA have shown
that shortening of the N terminus leads to a BMPR-IA protein
with decreased stability and enhanced aggregation tendency
(data not shown). The destabilized BMPR-IA mutant would
then exhibit a lower activity in cell-based assays and in vivo,
although its BMP-2 affinity is unaltered. The BMP co-receptor
Dragon was shown to bind directly to BMPR-IA and, thereby,
enhances BMP-2 signaling (43). If the mutation P34R attenu￾ates the interaction between BMPR-IA and Dragon, a loss of
BMP-2 activity would also be observed, offering another expla￾nation how the mutation P34R in BMPR-IA affects BMP-2
activity. However, future experiments are needed to elucidate
the mechanism by which the mutation P34R decreases
BMPR-IA activity in vivo.
Localization studies of the BMPR-IA mutants P34R, Y39D,
and T55I in cells do not indicate that unfolding affects translo￾cation of either receptor to the cell membrane. Rather, unfold￾ing of the Y39D and T55I mutants directly impairs binding
capabilities to BMP-2 leading to a loss of function. Because a
systemic knock-out of BMPR-IA has been shown to be lethal to
the embryo (15), only JPS patients with heterozygous mutations
are known. It seems the malignancy of the crypts is not caused
by reduction in BMP-2 signaling efficiency due to limited
expression of BMPR-IA by a single allele, nor are there indica￾tions that the mutations act dominant negative. Rather, a loss of
heterozygosity event in the intestinal epithelium causes a con￾ditional knock-out situation and, thus, likely triggers the tran￾sition from healthy condition to cancer in these patients (28).
Conditional knock-out studies in mice have revealed that the
BMP-2 signaling pathway is not only important for embryonic
development but has a severe impact on tissue homeostasis in
the adult organism (4). Besides these differentiation processes,
members of the transforming growth factor- superfamily have
been implicated in the control of cell proliferation and apopto￾sis, making them important regulators in tumor suppression
(44). In lung tissue and hair follicles, BMP-2 has been shown to
control proliferation, and inhibition of signaling leads to tumor
formation (45, 46). A similar role of BMP-2 in the control of
intestinal cell proliferation in the colon supports the hypothesis
that BMP-2 acts as a tumor suppressor in these cells, and loss of
anti-proliferative signals lead to tumor growth as in JPS. Inter￾estingly, Hardwick et al. (47) have shown that not only
BMPR-IA but also BMPR-IB is expressed on mRNA and pro￾tein levels in colon epithelial cells, leaving the question of why
BMP-2 signals are not transmitted via BMPR-IB in JPS.
Despite the fact that BMPR-IA and BMPR-IB are redundant
BMP type I receptors as far as SMAD signaling is concerned,
both receptors might individually address other non-SMAD
pathways, leading to the activation of different subsets of genes.
Thus, replacement with either receptor does not yield the same
physiological function. Therefore, to allow treatment of JPS, a
signaling cascade yielding similar anti-proliferative signals in
colon epithelial cells as for BMP-2 must be found.
Acknowledgments—We thank M. Gottermeier and C. So¨der for excel￾lent technical assistance and Werner Schmitz for support for mass
spectrometry analyses. We thank Peter ten Dijke for generously pro￾viding reporter gene constructs and stably BRE-luciferase-transfected
C3H10T1/2 cells. We acknowledge Moritz Buenemann for providing
the fluorescence cell surface marker and for support with the fluores￾cence localization studies. We gratefully thank Martin Erdmann￾Fiebiger from BESSY for assistance during data acquisition and grate￾fully acknowledge the access to the synchrotron radiation beamline
PX14.1 at BESSY, Berlin, Germany.
REFERENCES
1. Kingsley, D. M. (1994) Genes Dev. 8, 133–146
2. Massague, J. (1998) Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67, 753–791
3. Hogan, B. L. (1996) Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 6, 432–438
4. Chen, D., Zhao, M., and Mundy, G. R. (2004) Growth Factors 22, 233–241
5. Urist, M. R., Sato, K., Brownell, A. G., Malinin, T. I., Lietze, A., Huo, Y. K.,
Prolo, D. J., Oklund, S., Finerman, G. A., and DeLange, R. J. (1983) Proc.
Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 173, 194–199
6. Deckers, M. M. L., van Bezooijen, R. L., van der Horst, G., Hoogendam, J.,
van der Bent, C., Papapoulos, S. E., and Lowik, C. W. G. M. (2002) Endo￾crinology 143, 1545–1553
7. Hemmatibrivanlou, A., and Thomsen, G. H. (1995) Dev. Genet. 17, 78–89
8. Mehler, M. F., Mabie, P. C., Zhang, D., and Kessler, J. A. (1997) Trends
Neurosci. 20, 309–317
9. Shukunami, C., Ohta, Y., Sakuda, M., and Hiraki, Y. (1998) Exp. Cell Res.
241, 1–11
10. Zhang, S., Fantozzi, I., Tigno, D. D., Yi, E. S., Platoshyn, O., Thistlethwaite,
P. A., Kriett, J. M., Yung, G., Rubin, L. J., and Yuan, J. X. (2003) Am. J.
Physiol. Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol. 285, 740–754
11. Akiyama, S., Katagiri, T., Namiki, M., Yamaji, N., Yamamoto, N., Miyama,
K., Shibuya, H., Ueno, N., Wozney, J. M., and Suda, T. (1997) Exp. Cell Res.
235, 362–369
12. Tendijke, P., Yamashita, H., Ichijo, H., Franzen, P., Laiho, M., Miyazono,
K., and Heldin, C. H. (1994) Science 264, 101–104
13. Ro, T. B., Holt, R. U., Brenne, A. T., Hjorth-Hansen, H., Waage, A., Hjert￾ner, O., Sundan, A., and Borset, M. (2004) Oncogene 23, 3024–3032
14. Chen, D., Ji, X., Harris, M. A., Feng, J. Q., Karsenty, G., Celeste, A. J., Rosen,
V., Mundy, G. R., and Harris, S. E. (1998) J. Cell Biol. 142, 295–305
15. Mishina, Y., Suzuki, A., Ueno, N., and Behringer, R. R. (1995) Genes Dev. 9,
3027–3037
16. Nishitoh, H., Ichijo, H., Kimura, M., Matsumoto, T., Makishima, F.,
Yamaguchi, A., Yamashita, H., Enomoto, S., and Miyazono, K. (1996)
J. Biol. Chem. 271, 21345–21352
17. Ebisawa, T., Tada, K., Kitajima, I., Tojo, K., Sampath, T. K., Kawabata, M.,
Miyazono, K., and Imamura, T. (1999) J. Cell Sci. 112, 3519–3527
18. Yamashita, H., ten Dijke, P., Huylebroeck, D., Sampath, T. K., Andries, M.,
Smith, J. C., Heldin, C. H., and Miyazono, K. (1995) J. Cell Biol. 130,
217–226
19. Miyazono, K., Kusanagi, K., and Inoue, H. (2001) J. Cell. Physiol. 187,
265–276
20. Nickel, J., Kotzsch, A., Sebald, W., and Mueller, T. D. (2005) J. Mol. Biol.
349, 933–947
21. Seemann, P., Schwappacher, R., Kjaer, K. W., Krakow, D., Lehmann, K.,
Dawson, K., Stricker, S., Pohl, J., Ploger, F., Staub, E., Nickel, J., Sebald, W.,
Knaus, P., and Mundlos, S. (2005) J. Clin. Investig. 115, 2373–2381
22. Deng, Z., Morse, J. H., Slager, S. L., Cuervo, N., Moore, K. J., Venetos, G.,
Kalachikov, S., Cayanis, E., Fischer, S. G., Barst, R. J., Hodge, S. E., and
Knowles, J. A. (2000) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67, 737–744
23. Machado, R. D., Aldred, M. A., James, V., Harrison, R. E., Patel, B.,
Mechanisms in BMP Type I Receptor Recognition
5886 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 283•NUMBER 9•FEBRUARY 29, 2008
 by guest on February 22, 2015 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from Schwalbe, E. C., Gruenig, E., Janssen, B., Koehler, R., Seeger, W., Eickel￾berg, O., Olschewski, H., Elliott, C. G., Glissmeyer, E., Carlquist, J., Kim,
M., Torbicki, A., Fijalkowska, A., Szewczyk, G., Parma, J., Abramowicz,
M. J., Galie, N., Morisaki, H., Kyotani, S., Nakanishi, N., Morisaki, T.,
Humbert, M., Simonneau, G., Sitbon, O., Soubrier, F., Coulet, F., Morrell,
N. W., and Trembath, R. C. (2006) Hum. Mutat. 27, 121–132
24. Everman, D. B., Bartels, C. F., Yang, Y., Yanamandra, N., Goodman, F. R.,
Mendoza-Londono, J. R., Savarirayan, R., White, S. M., Graham, J. M., Jr.,
Gale, R. P., Svarch, E., Newman, W. G., Kleckers, A. R., Francomano, C. A.,
Govindaiah, V., Singh, L., Morrison, S., Thomas, J. T., and Warman, M. L.
(2002) Am. J. Med. Genet. 112, 291–296
25. Lehmann, K., Seemann, P., Stricker, S., Sammar, M., Meyer, B., Suring, K.,
Majewski, F., Tinschert, S., Grzeschik, K. H., Muller, D., Knaus, P., Nurn￾berg, P., and Mundlos, S. (2003) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100,
12277–12282
26. Kaplan, F. S., Glaser, D. L., Pignolo, R. J., and Shore, E. M. (2007) Expert
Opin. Biol. Ther. 7, 705–712
27. Howe, J. R., Sayed, M. G., Ahmed, A. F., Ringold, J., Larsen-Haidle, J.,
Merg, A., Mitros, F. A., Vaccaro, C. A., Petersen, G. M., Giardiello, F. M.,
Tinley, S. T., Aaltonen, L. A., and Lynch, H. T. (2004) J. Med. Genet. 41,
484–491
28. Howe, J. R., Bair, J. L., Sayed, M. G., Anderson, M. E., Mitros, F. A., Pe￾tersen, G. M., Velculescu, V. E., Traverso, G., and Vogelstein, B. (2001)
Nat. Genet. 28, 184–187
29. Kim, B. G., Li, C., Qiao, W., Mamura, M., Kasprzak, B., Anver, M., Wol￾fraim, L., Hong, S., Mushinski, E., Potter, M., Kim, S. J., Fu, X. Y., Deng, C.,
and Letterio, J. J. (2006) Nature 441, 1015–1019
30. Auclair, B. A., Benoit, Y. D., Rivard, N., Mishina, Y., and Perreault, N.
(2007) Gastroenterology 133, 887–896
31. Kirsch, T., Nickel, J., and Sebald, W. (2000) EMBO J. 19, 3314–3324
32. Keller, S., Nickel, J., Zhang, J. L., Sebald, W., and Mueller, T. D. (2004) Nat.
Struct. Mol. Biol. 11, 481–488
33. Howe, J. R., Roth, S., Ringold, J. C., Summers, R. W., Jarvinen, H. J., Sis￾tonen, P., Tomlinson, I. P., Houlston, R. S., Bevan, S., Mitros, F. A., Stone,
E. M., and Aaltonen, L. A. (1998) Science 280, 1086–1088
34. Phillips, D. J., Brauman, J. N., Mason, A. J., de Kretser, D. M., and Hedger,
M. P. (1999) J. Endocrinol. 162, 111–116
35. Ely, K. R., and Li, C. (2002) J. Mol. Recognit. 15, 286–290
36. Li, C., Norris, P. S., Ni, C. Z., Havert, M. L., Chiong, E. M., Tran, B. R.,
Cabezas, E., Reed, J. C., Satterthwait, A. C., Ware, C. F., and Ely, K. R.
(2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 50523–50529
37. Ma, B., Elkayam, T.,Wolfson, H., and Nussinov, R. (2003) Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 100, 5772–5777
38. Ma, B., Shatsky, M., Wolfson, H. J., and Nussinov, R. (2002) Protein Sci. 11,
184–197
39. Greenwald, J., Groppe, J., Gray, P., Wiater, E., Kwiatkowski, W., Vale, W.,
and Choe, S. (2003) Mol. Cell 11, 605–617
40. Thompson, T. B., Woodruff, T. K., and Jardetzky, T. S. (2003) EMBO J. 22,
1555–1566
41. Mace, P. D., Cutfield, J. F., and Cutfield, S. M. (2006) Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 351, 831–838
42. Allendorph, G. P., Vale, W. W., and Choe, S. (2006) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 103, 7643–7648
43. Samad, T. A., Rebbapragada, A., Bell, E., Zhang, Y., Sidis, Y., Jeong, S. J.,
Campagna, J. A., Perusini, S., Fabrizio, D. A., Schneyer, A. L., Lin, H. Y.,
Brivanlou, A. H., Attisano, L., and Woolf, C. J. (2005) J. Biol. Chem. 280,
14122–14129
44. de Caestecker, M. P., Piek, E., and Roberts, A. B. (2000) J. Natl. Cancer Inst.
92, 1388–1402
45. Eblaghie, M. C., Reedy, M., Oliver, T., Mishina, Y., and Hogan, B. L. (2006)
Dev. Biol. 291, 67–82
46. Ming Kwan, K., Li, A. G., Wang, X. J., Wurst, W., and Behringer, R. R.
(2004) Genesis 39, 10–25
47. Hardwick, J. C. H., Van den Brink, G. R., Bleuming, S. A., Ballester, I., Van
den Brande, J. M. H., Keller, J. J., Offerhaus, G. J. A., Van Deventer, S. J. H.,
and Peppelenbosch, M. P. (2004) Gastroenterology 126, 111–121
Mechanisms in BMP Type I Receptor Recognition
FEBRUARY 29, 2008•VOLUME 283•NUMBER 9 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 5887
 by guest on February 22, 2015 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from Thomas D. Mueller
Thomas Herrmann, Walter Sebald and
Seher, Kai Heinecke, Laura van Geersdaele, 
Alexander Kotzsch, Joachim Nickel, Axel
 
Syndrome
Inactivation in Juvenile Polyposis 
Reveals a Mechanism of Receptor
Protein-2 Type I Receptor Complexes 
Structure Analysis of Bone Morphogenetic
Protein Structure and Folding:
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M706029200 originally published online December 26, 2007
J. Biol. Chem. 2008, 283:5876-5887.
 
Access the most updated version of this article at doi: 10.1074/jbc.M706029200
 
Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the JBC Affinity Sites.
Alerts: 
 
• When a correction for this article is posted
• When this article is cited
Click here to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts
Supplemental material:
 
http://www.jbc.org/content/suppl/2007/12/27/M706029200.DC1.html
 
http://www.jbc.org/content/283/9/5876.full.html#ref-list-1
This article cites 47 references, 19 of which can be accessed free at
 by guest on February 22, 2015 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from 