A role for differential variable gene pairing in creating T cell receptors specific for unique major histocompatibility ligands SUMMARY A limited set of T cell receptor (TCR) variable (V) gene segments are used to create a repertoire of TCRs that recognize all major histocompatibility complex (MHC) ligands within a species.
How individual TCRs are constructed to specifically recognize a limited set of MHC ligands is unclear.
Here we have identified a role for the differential paring of particular V gene segments in creating TCRs that recognized MHC class II ligands exclusively, or cross-reacted with classical and non-classical MHC class I ligands.
Biophysical and structural experiments indicated TCR specificity for MHC ligands is not driven by germline encoded pairwise interactions.
Rather, identical TCR chains can have altered peptide-MHC (pMHC) binding modes when paired with different TCR chains.
The ability of TCR chain pairing to modify how V region residues interact with pMHC helps to explain how the same V genes are used to create TCRs specific for unique MHC ligands.
 INTRODUCTION T cell antigen receptors (TCR) recognize ligands displayed on classical Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC), non-classical MHC and MHC-like proteins.
Classical MHC proteins are the most polymorphic genes in humans.
Within a population, MHC allele diversity greatly limits the ability of pathogens to escape immune responses.
However, the diversity of MHC creates a unique problem for generating host-MHC restricted mature T cell repertoires.
Prior to selection, TCR rearrangement has to generate a collection of TCRs which, in aggregate, have the ability to recognize any of the possible MHC classes and alleles present within a species.
After selection, individual TCRs must be MHC class specific, allowing a division of labor between MHC class II-reactive helper T cells and MHC class I-reactive cytotoxic T cells.
 The ability to create TCR repertoires specific for ligands presented by all classes and alleles of MHC requires the generation of individual receptors with a spectrum of MHC ligand binding modes.
Remarkably, TCRs accomplish this using V gene segments with limited diversity within the complementarity determining region-1 (CDR1) and CDR2 loops, the portions of the TCR which primarily contact the MHC.
The majority of TCR diversity occurs within the V(D)J junctional region of the CDR3 loops that sit atop the bound peptide ligand.
Thymocytes that express these randomly generated TCRs are prone to react with cells expressing pMHC ligands.
To mature, pre-selection thymocytes expressing these TCRs are subjected to the selective pressures of positive selection to ensure T cells are MHC restricted, and negative selection to limit autoimmunity.
 To account for the high frequency at which self-pMHC reactive TCRs are created, it has been hypothesized that TCRs and MHCs have co-evolved to bind one another.
The co-evolution of TCRs and MHC could involve the overall shape complementarity of TCRs and MHC, the selection for specific pairwise contacts between V gene residues and MHC (interaction codons) or the selection of amino acids at the tips of CDR loops (such a tyrosine) that can make a variety of chemical bonds.
Co-evolution models, however, have to account for several facets of ligand recognition.
Both MHC class I and MHC class II specific TCRs are created from all TCR V gene families and from individual TCR rearrangements.
Thus, the identical TCR or TCR residues are capable of binding structurally somewhat dissimilar and extremely polymorphic MHC class I and MHC class II proteins.
In addition, crystallographic and biophysical studies show that TCRs use a variety of semi-conserved diagonal docking modes to bind MHC.
The only strict rules of engagement so far identified are the overall orientation of TCR binding pMHC and the requirement of the CDR3 loop(s) to contact the MHC-bound antigen.
 To decipher why self-reactive TCRs are created at a high frequency, we began studying T cells that develop in mice with limited negative selection.
We isolated T cells that recognize the MHC class II molecule IAb presenting the 3K peptide (IAb-3K).
Many of these T cells are self-reactive requiring only a few residues of the peptide for recognition and primarily engage either the MHC class II -chain, or MHC class II -chain.
These pMHC reactivity patterns are highly analogous to some self-reactive TCRs, isolated from patients with Multiple Sclerosis and its mouse model, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), which utilize unconventional binding modes.
Additionally, many of the IAb-3K reactive TCRs expressed on the T cells that develop when negative selection is limited are highly allo-MHC class II reactive, and two were shown to cross-react with classical MHC class I ligands.
In contrast, IAb-3K reactive TCRs isolated from conventional, C57BL/6 mice, are self-tolerant, dependent upon multiple residues of the peptide and had a standard rate of allo-MHC class II reactivity.
The self-reactive, pMHC cross-reactive T cells and the self-tolerant, pMHC specific TCRs all used V8.1, V8.2 and V14 TCR chains paired with a diverse array of TCR V chains.
The construction of TCRs with different pMHC specificities and pMHC cross-reactivity patterns from the same V gene segments strongly suggests that control mechanisms must exist to modify how germline TCR residues engage MHC proteins.
 To identify mechanisms that control TCR ligand specificity, we isolated and characterized a set of TCRs reactive to IAb-3K carrying the identical TCR chain.
The TCRs were either self-tolerant or self-reactive, and differed in the ability to cross-react with other classes of MHC ligands.
By comparing how each receptor bound the same pMHC complex, we sought to identify how TCR chain-pairing affects MHC specificity.
X-ray crystallographic and biophysical experiments indicated that MHC specific TCRs and MHC class cross-reactive TCRs utilize a spectrum of pMHC binding modes within a conventional docking footprint.
Our data demonstrate that differential TCR -chain pairing can result in MHC specific TCRs that have altered TCR CDR loop conformations and placements, as well as modified TCR-MHC contacts.
 RESULTS Identification of IAb-3K reactive T cells with different pMHC specificities Why randomly created TCRs are prone to being self-reactive and how this pre-bias is shaped into a foreign antigen specific, self-tolerant T cell repertoire remains unclear.
We created a model to identify mechanisms that control TCR specificity by generating mice expressing the V8.2 TCR chain of the IAb-3K reactive YAe62 TCR as a transgene (YAe62 mice).
YAe62 mice allow for the isolation of IAb-3K reactive TCRs carrying the identical TCR chain sequence which develop in either conventional mice and are dependent upon MHC class II proteins for positive selection (defined here as MHC specific), or develop in MHC class II-deficient mice and are dependent upon MHC class I or non-classical MHC class I ligands for positive selection (defined here as MHC cross-reactive).
By comparing how these TCRs engage pMHC, we sought to identify how TCR chain pairing controls ligand specificity.
 YAe62 mice are biased towards creating TCRs reactive to IAb-3K and the related ligand, IAb-P-1K.
These results were expected, as the T cell repertoire in mice containing a transgenic TCR chain are often biased towards the antigen specificity of the parent TCR.
To identify conventional, MHC specific T cells, YAe62 mice were bred onto a MHCwt genetic background.
In MHCwt YAe62 mice, T cells expressing IAb-3K and P-1K reactive TCRs were exclusively in the CD4+ subset of the spleen (Figure 1AF).
To identify MHC cross-reactive T cells, YAe62 mice were bred onto mice deficient in MHC class II expression, MHC CL2null (H2-Ab1/, Cd74/).
A high frequency of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells reactive to IAb-3K and IAb-P-1K ligand developed in MHC CL2null YAe62 mice as well.
A severe reduction in IAb-3K and P-1K-reactive T cells was observed in MHCnull (B2m/, H2-Ab1/, Cd74/) YAe62 mice indicating the development of these T cells in MHC CL2null mice requires 2M-dependent MHC or MHC-like ligand for selection.
Thus, the IAb-3K and P-1K reactive T cells that develop in MHC CL2null mice are reactive to multiple classes of MHC; MHC class II as they react with IAb tetramers and a selecting 2M-dependent classical, non-classical or MHC-like ligand.
Experiments indicate that some IAb-3K reactive, MHC cross-reactive TCRs can cross-react with H2-Kb ligands, while others cross-react with the non-classical, MHC-like ligand CD1d (see below).
Both IAb-3K and P-1K-reactive T cells were studied as they express semi-overlapping T cell repertoires in MHCwt and MHC CL2null mice, both of which the YAe62 mice are biased to recognize.
All of the mice used in this study were heterozygous for the TCR C gene to eliminate the possibility that mature T cells co-express two different TCRs.
 To ensure the MHC specific and MHC cross-reactive T cell populations functioned normally, YAe62 mice were challenged to make an IAb-3K and P-1K T cell response (Figure 1GL).
Mice were immunized with a vaccinia virus expressing the peptide epitope 3K, or P-1K, fused to the carboxyl termini of IAb (Vac:IAb-3K, Vac:IAb-P-1K).
Because the MHC CL2null mice used in this study are only deficient in IAb, the virally expressed IAb-3K protein pairs with the endogenous IAb chain resulting in the cell surface expression of IAb-3K on infected cells.
The expansion of IAb-3K and P-1K-reactive T cells in mice on each MHC background indicated the MHC specific and MHC cross-reactive T cells were functional.
The generation of IAb-3K reactive T cell responses in MHC CL2null mice was independent of TCR transgene expression as non-TCR Tg MHC CL2null mice mounted a strong IAb-3K specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cell response following Vac:IAb-3K infection (Figure S1AF).
 Germline encoded TCR sequences and thymic selection impact MHC specificity If TCR ligand specificity is strictly created by CDR3 rearrangement, then V genes should not segregate to either the MHC specific or MHC cross-reactive T cell populations.
Strikingly, we observed that TCR V gene family usage is a precise indicator of whether YAe62+ TCRs are MHC specific or MHC cross-reactive.
IAb-3K and P-1K reactive CD4+ T cells in MHCwt YAe62 mice primarily expressed TCRs containing the V2 gene segment (Figure 1 MR and Table S1).
These V2+ T cells were absent in MHC CL2null mice, indicating they require IAb to undergo positive selection.
IAb-3K and P-1K reactive CD4+ T cells in MHC CL2null YAe62 mice, however, often contain a V11+ gene segment.
These V11+ T cells were absent in both MHCwt mice and in MHCnull mice.
Their absence in MHCwt YAe62 mice strongly suggests they are subject to MHC class II-mediated negative selection, while their absence in MHCnull YAe62 mice indicates these T cells require a 2M-dependent ligand for positive selection.
 Consistent with these interpretations, these V11+ T cells were eliminated in chimeric mice which exclusively express MHC class II on bone marrow derived cells (Figure S1GJ).
Furthermore, IAb-3K and P-1K reactive V11+ and V5+ T cell hybridomas generated from MHC CL2null YAe62 mice were self-reactive, while V2+ T cell hybridomas were self-tolerant.
In addition, several of the V11+ TCRs were found to be reactive, albeit with weak affinity, with 2M-dependent, non-classical MHC CD1d ligands (Figures 2AH, S2).
IAb-3K reactive CD8+ T cells in MHC CL2null mice (including the parent YAe62 TCR) often use a V4+ and not a V2+ TCR, and are cross-reactive with several classical MHC class I ligands.
Thus, TCR V gene family segregation suggests that the generation of MHC specific TCRs can require specific germline encoded TCR residues.
Similar to our previous studies, TCR specificity is not dependent upon affinity as MHC cross-reactive TCRs recognizing IAb and CD1d or IAb and H2-Kb have equilibrium affinities for IAb-3K that overlap with MHC specific TCRs (Figures 2 IL, S2 and Table S2).
 TCR pairing can modify how TCR chains bind pMHC The segregation of IAb-3K reactive MHC specific and MHC cross-reactive T cells in YAe62 mice based on TCR V gene usage suggested that germline encoded TCR residues are directly contributing to MHC specificity.
Thus, it was possible that the observed V2 bias in the MHC specific repertoire stemmed from the creation of additional interactions between CDR1 and CDR2 loops with IAb.
To identify the side chain residues important for MHC specific TCRs and MHC cross-reactive TCRs to bind IAb-3K, alanine scanning mutagenesis using surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and a TCR multimer staining assay was performed (Figure 3 and Table S3).
Similar results were obtained using both methods.
By comparing the change in binding affinity (G) when a residue is substituted to alanine, the binding affinity contributed by each residue side chain can be calculated.
 Both MHC specific TCRs and MHC cross-reactive TCRs bind IAb with a conventional footprint.
This is visualized in Figures 3 and S3 by color-coding IAb-3K residue side chains according to the amount of binding energy contributed to TCR binding.
Surprisingly, there is an overall lack in requirements for IAb side chain residues, the portion of the MHC that is primarily contacted by the TCR chain.
These data strongly suggests V2 residues are not creating specificity through additional contacts with the MHC.
The only IAb side chain required for high affinity binding for all of the TCRs is R70.
For the IAb residues, primarily contacted by the TCR chain, all TCRs relied on IAb residues K39, L60, N62 and V65 for at least medium affinity binding (>0.8 kcal/mol), whereas none of the TCRs require V72 nor K75.
Consistent with observations from previous studies, MHC specific TCRs on average rely more on peptide and MHC residue side chains for strong binding (>1.5 kcal/mol) than MHC cross-reactive TCRs (Figures 3, S3 and Table S3).
The increase in peptide dependence is similarly observed in polyclonal T cell responses isolated from MHCwt versus MHC CL2null mice (Figure S3).
 MHC specific V2+ TCRs were observed to use energetically unique binding energetics at likely TCR-MHC contacts, while MHC cross-reactive TCRs used energetically similar TCR-MHC binding modes (Figures 4, S4).
The TCR V8.2 chain within the parent YAe62 TCR primarily contacts the IAb chain at K39, Q57, and Q61 using the TCR CDR2 residues Y46, Y48 and E54, along with CDR3 residues W95 contacting Q61.
Since all of the TCRs investigated here carry the same TCR V chain, changes in binding affinity (G) at TCR V-pMHC contacts can be solely ascribed to modifications induced by differential TCR chain pairing.
Each of the MHC specific V2+ TCRs had differential requirements for the IAb Q57 or Q61 side chains relative to the parent YAe62 TCR (Figure 4).
The TCR residues, Y46, Y48 and E54, were often required for both MHC specific and cross-reactive TCRs to bind IAb-3K.
Thus, the generation of TCRs containing the V2 gene segment results in receptors which have modified how the identical TCR V gene residues bind pMHC.
 Structural comparison of an MHC specific and an MHC cross-reactive TCR To identify in detail how paring a V2 TCR -chain with the YAe62 -chain creates pMHC specificity, we determined the 2.7 crystal structure of the J809.B5 TCR bound to IAb-3K and compared it to the 3.2 structure of the YAe62 TCR bound to IAb-3K (Table S4).
The shared use of the identical V chain provides a direct way to evaluate how different V pairings control ligand specificity.
The overall orientation and size of the interfaces of the two complexes were highly similar (Figure 5AE).
Additionally, the conformation of the TCR C, and TCR C domains, and the TCR V and TCR V framework regions, superpose closely.
The total buried surface area (BSA) for the J809.B5 complex is approximately 1560 2, comparable to 1410 2 for the parent YAe62 complex.
In both cases the TCR chain contributes the majority of contacts to IAb-3K, 74% of the total BSA for the J809.B5 TCR, versus 67% for YAe62 TCR (Figure 5 FG).
Some conformational differences were observed for the TCR subunit, which was expected due to the alternate -chain usage (Figure 6).
Thus, as was observed with the energetic footprint analysis (Figure 3), the J809.B5 TCR does not create self-tolerance from gross structural alterations.
 Alternative TCR to pMHC contacts by the J809.B5 TCR versus the YAe62 TCR explains the change in peptide recognition of J809.B5.
The majority of the YAe62 TCR contacts with IAb-3K involve CDR1 Y29 engaging the IAb chain residues T77 and H81 (Figure 6B, blue).
This MHC-dominant binding mode allows the YAe62 TCR to be less-sensitive to alanine substitutions at several residues of the peptide.
In contrast, the J809.B5 TCR does not make any substantial contacts with the IAb chain (Figure 6B, orange), consistent with the energetic binding data (Figure 3).
However, the J809.B5 CDR3 residues make extensive interactions with the peptide, including salt bridges and hydrogen bonds to the peptide side chains at P-1E, P3K and P5K, (Figure 6C, orange), explaining why these peptide residues contribute 1.1, >2.2 and >2.2 kcal/mol, respectively, of binding affinity (Table S2).
 The J809.B5 TCR binds IAb-3K with an altered TCR-pMHC binding mode Despite having the identical TCR sequence, the TCR chains within the J809.B5 and YAe62 TCRs bind IAb-3K differently.
The J809.B5 V2 chain pairing results in the TCR binding IAb-3K with a modified CDR3 loop conformation, and a rigid body movement that rotates the TCR chain 12  towards the center of the interface (Figure 6A, compare J809.B5 CDR3 (green) with YAe62 CDR3 ( red)).
In conjunction with the modified TCR-pMHC binding mode a set of TCR to TCR inter-chain contacts are observed between TCR CDR1, CDR2 and CDR3 residue side chains (orange) with the CDR3 loop (green) (Figure 7A).
Most prominent are contacts between CDR1 Y31 and CDR2 R50 with CDR3 J D97, and between CDR3 J A96 with CDR3 J W95, contacts that are not present in the MHC cross-reactive YAe62 TCR.
 Differential TCR chain pairing results in TCRs with altered ligand recognition at key TCR contacts of the MHC and peptide.
A favorable contact between IAb Q61 and a cluster of residues contributed by CDR1, CDR2, and CDR3 (Figure S5) results in a high affinity interaction for the J809.B5 TCR (Figure 2).
For the YAe62 TCR, this contact is less favorable, because the YAe62 V T97 residue (not shown) forces IAb Q61 to adopt an alternate rotamer that makes different contacts with CDR3 (Figure S5).
The side chain rotamer changes at IAb Q61 and P5K of the peptide allows the J809.B5 V W95 to insert into a pocket created by the P5K, IAb Q61 and N62 residues despite having a different CDR3 conformation.
Overall, the J809.B5 TCR creates pMHC specificity by increasing the number of CDR3 contacts with peptide, and using a modified set of TCR contacts with both the peptide and MHC.
 The J809.B5 TCR and YAe62 TCR structural comparison demonstrates that one control mechanism which impacts ligand specificity is the ability to modify how TCR CDR loop residues bind pMHC.
To determine if additional TCR chain pairings result in receptors with an altered contribution of specific CDR3 residues for binding IAb-3K, we expressed IAb-3K reactive TCRs carrying alanine substitutions at the CDR3 residues D93, F94 and W95 and measured how these substitutions impacted ligand binding.
The parent YAe62 TCR creates an H-bond between the CDR3 D93 side chain and the CDR3 backbone at T98 (Figure 7B).
The disruption of this contact eliminates the ability of the YAe62 TCR to bind IAb-3K (Figure 7D).
In contrast, this H-bond is not present in the J809.B5 TCR due to the CDR3 conformational change and thus, the D93 to alanine substitution has minimal effect on binding IAb-3K (Figure 7C, D).
Analysis of the other TCRs revealed that all MHC cross-reactive TCRs required CDR3 D93 for binding to IAb-3K, while this residue was not required for any MHC specific TCRs.
The MHC specific TCRs are more dependent upon CDR3 F94 for binding, while the W95 residue is required for all of the TCRs.
Taken together, these results indicate that differential TCR chain pairings result in MHC specific TCRs which have changed how the TCR CDR3 chain engages IAb-3K.
 DISCUSSION The identical set of TCR V genes are used to create TCRs that are specific for either classical or non-classical MHC class I or MHC class II ligands.
Although there are reports of some TCR V genes being preferentially used in either CD4+ or CD8+ T cell populations, none of the V genes are precluded from creating MHC class I or MHC class II specific receptors (; Valkenburg et al.).
Thus, TCRs are able to utilize a limited set of TCR V gene residues to create receptors that bind the highly diverse set of ligands.
The dichotomy that individual TCR chains can be incorporated into receptors that are able to bind a wide range of polymorphic MHC ligands, while complete receptors can specifically engage a limited set of MHC ligands, strongly suggests TCR chain pairings limit MHC cross-reactivity.
The isolation of MHC specific and MHC cross-reactive, IAb-3K reactive TCRs carrying the identical TCR chain allowed us to identify mechanisms by which TCRs become MHC specific.
 Several mechanisms likely allow TCR chain pairing to create receptors that are specific for MHC ligands.
These could include the binding requirements of each TCR chain for the pMHC, modification of CDR loop conformational structures, CDR loop positioning or induced alterations of the TCR or pMHC complexes that arise during binding.
Not surprisingly, the self-tolerant, MHC specific TCRs carrying the YAe62 chain required binding energy to be contributed from multiple residues of the peptide at likely TCR contacts.
However, MHC specific TCRs did not require additional MHC contacts at potential TCR binding sites.
Within the J809.B5 TCR-pMHC structure, no contacts were observed between the CDR1 and CDR2 loops with IAb-3K.
Our data further demonstrated that TCR pairings, which created MHC specific TCRs, had a modified TCR binding reaction with pMHC.
Thus, TCR chains did not influence pMHC specificity by requiring additional MHC class or allele specific contacts.
This was a surprising observation given the strong V2 gene segregation to MHC specific TCR, and suggested this skewing was not based on TCR V gene residues providing contacts with the pMHC.
 The phenomena of TCR V gene skewing is well documented in graft rejection, responses to viruses, autoimmunity and MHC restriction.
Three major TCR V gene skewings occur; the use a particular TCR V gene family with diverse CDR3 sequences, the selection for TCRs which carry a particular CDR3 N-D-J sequence motif, and those T cell responses which select the identical TCR or TCR sequence.
The investigations of the molecular basis of TCR V skewing have focused on identifying particular TCR residues that mediate or stabilize pMHC binding, and have found heavily CDR3 dependent binding TCRs, as well as TCRs which require multiple contacts between germline CDR1 and CDR2 residues with MHC.
Experiments here suggest an additional role for particular TCR V gene residues in allowing or restraining MHC cross-reactivity, and thus creating MHC ligand specificity.
 The two IAb-3K-reactive TCRs (4.A5 and 4.A6) which cross-react with CD1d-PBS57 use the identical or near identical CDR3 sequence as the J50+ non-canonical CD1d-reactive TCR 143.3, and a set of V10+ non-canonical CD1d-reactive TCRs.
The recent structure of a V10-J50 TCR bound to CD1d indicates these TCRs bind CD1d with a relatively similar docking mode as the canonical V14-J18 NKT TCRs.
This TCR-CD1d docking footprint is highly divergent from the docking site of TCRs on MHC class II proteins.
These binding site differences suggest the 4.A5 and 4.A6 TCR CDR loops are either sufficiently flexible, like the parent YAe62 TCR, to adopt two distinct conformations allowing similar amino acids to bind different classes of MHC ligands or these TCRs are in the same confirmation and bind MHC class II and CD1d with different strategies.
The conservation of the CDR3 sequences of non-canonical TCRs binding CD1d strongly suggest the J50 sequence of the 4.A5 and 4.A6 TCRs is contributing to the MHC class cross-reactivity.
In addition, the strong bias to express a V11+ TCR suggests the germline residues are also involved in creating reactivity for CD1d and or IAb-3K.
 In contrast to the J50+ MHC cross-reactive TCRs, the three MHC specific V2+ TCRs studied in detail were generated from two different J family members and had CDR3 lengths of 12, 13 and 14 amino acids.
Surprisingly, the V2+ TCRs did not require additional binding affinity to be contributed from MHC contacts at potential TCR binding sites.
Within the J809.B5 TCR structure, the CDR1 and CDR2 residues do not contact the pMHC.
Instead germline encoded residues of the V2 loops along with CDR3 residues make direct contacts with the TCR chain.
These TCR to TCR inter-chain contacts may create or stabilize the altered TCR CDR3 conformation.
Thus, germline encoded TCR V sequences may aid the generation of pMHC ligand specificity by providing inter-chain contacts which influence the placement or conformations of paired TCR chain loops.
 The pairing of the YAe62 chain with V2 TCR chains, creating MHC specific TCRs, resulted in the V8.2 portion of the TCRs to engage IAb-3K with diverse interactions.
The V8.2 gene segment contains CDR2 residues Y46, Y48 and E54, which have been found to make pairwise contacts with the IA residues 39K, 57Q and 61Q; a proposed interaction codon that guides TCR recognition of pMHC.
Most of the TCRs studied here used all three of the CDR2 residues Y46, Y48 and E54 in binding IAb-3K, consistent with the findings that the same V gene residues are often used to bind pMHC.
In addition, the MHC IAb side chains of the interaction codon, 39K, 57Q and 61Q, were not always required by the MHC specific TCRs to bind IAb-3K.
These observations are inconsistent with the model that MHC reactivity arises from structurally encoded specific pairwise contacts between TCRs and MHC.
Rather, our data indicates individual TCR CDR loop residues can engage pMHC with an array of interactions, which can be influenced by the paired TCR chain.
TCR-pMHC binding specificity will likely be impacted by allelic variations of TCR and TCR sequences as well.
The variable requirements for centrally located, often recognized MHC side chains have been noted for TCR binding to MHC class I as well.
The highly conserved, MHC class I residues Q65, T69 and Q155 are invariably contacted by most bound TCRs, yet they also contribute variable amounts of binding energy for individual TCRs.
 How often TCR to TCR contacts impact ligand specificity is unknown.
All TCRs make extensive TCR to TCR inter-chain contacts which can occur between residues of the two CDR3 loops, and between residues of CDR3 with CDR1 and CDR2.
Analyses of the few structures of TCRs which carry an identical TCR or TCR sequence support the idea that TCR to TCR interactions can modify how TCRs bind MHC ligands.
Though still specific for the same antigen, the pairing of a V7+ versus a V8.2+ TCR chain with the canonical V14J18 NKT TCR chain resulted in residues of the CDR3 chain to adopt different rotamers.
Localized side chain rotamer changes at the TCR-pMHC binding site were similarly observed for a set of human TCRs, the TK3 receptor and altered versions carrying TCR micropolymorphisms.
Consistent with the hypothesis that TCR chains can modify the ligand specificity of the paired chain, TCRs containing a TCR chain from the 149.42 TCR specific H2-Kb + OVA can be incorporated into TCRs specific for H2-Db + influenza.
However, the mechanism which allows the 149.42 TCR chain to bind an alternate unique ligand is currently unknown.
In addition, molecular modeling experiments suggest TCR inter-chain contacts will contribute to the specificity of human TCRs reactive to influenza as well.
TCR induced changes to TCR were not, however, observed in the structures of the 2C TCR and the highly similar, high affinity variant M6 bound to H2-Ld.
Thus, the impact of chain pairing on how each TCR  or  chain binds pMHC ligands can span from no effect all the way to the rigid body movements and CDR3 conformational changes observed for the J809.B5 and YAe62 TCRs.
 The strength of the interaction of the TCR with MHC ligands does not appear to regulate MHC specificity, as MHC specific and MHC cross-reactive TCRs had similar equilibrium affinity for IAb-3K.
These data are consistent with our previous findings indicating that peptide cross-reactive TCRs and peptide specific TCRs having similar equilibrium affinities.
In other systems, cross-reactive pMHC ligands have been identified for a multitude of different T cells.
The affinities or avidities for the cross-reactive ligands have been demonstrated to be weak or strong.
For the MHC class cross-reactive ligands described here, the 4.A5 and 4.A6 TCRs have a weak interaction with the non-classical MHC class I ligand, CD1d-PBS57, though it is possible that other bound ligands may facilitate stronger affinity interactions with these TCRs.
In contrast, the YAe62 TCR is strongly allo-reactive to self peptides presented by H-2k MHC class I proteins, and recognizes a H2-Kb ligand with an equilibrium affinity of 15M. These data indicate TCR recognition of the cross-reactive MHC ligand does not have an intrinsically strong or weak affinity.
TCR-pMHC affinity certainly dictates the threshold of whether a T cell functionally engages a cross-reactive ligand; however, our data strongly suggest TCR specificity for unique MHC ligands in not based on affinity.
 Despite intense research and an increasing number of TCR-pMHC structures, the reason why TCRs are prone to being self-reactive and how specificity arises for foreign antigens is largely lacking in detail.
We have demonstrated that differential TCR paring can alter how TCR chains engage MHC, and influence the pMHC specificity of the TCR.
The ability to affect TCR-MHC ligand specificity by subtle binding site reorganization and loop conformational changes through differential chain pairing likely enhances the efficiency of creating an TCR repertoire that can bind all the possible MHCs present within the species, while simultaneously providing a mechanism for limiting the self-reactive and cross-reactive nature of TCRs.
 EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Mice C57BL/6, 2-microglobulin (b2m/), Invariant chain/ (Cd74/), and TCR C/ mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME).
H-2Ab1/ (Class II/) mice were purchased from Taconic (Germantown, NY).
MHCwt: TCR C+/ C57BL/6 mice; MHC CL2null: TCR C+/, Cd74/ H-2Ab1/, C57BL/6 mice; MHCnull: TCR C+/, B2m/, Cd74/ H-2Ab1/, C57BL/6 mice.
Tcrb Tg mice were established by expressing rearranged PCR cloned TCRs using the human CD2 promoter.
The Tg TCR chain is expressed on >99% of all CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.
All mice were maintained in a pathogen-free environment in accordance with institutional guidelines in the Animal Care Facility at the University of Massachusetts Medical School. Recombinant Vaccinia viruses and immunization of mice Recombinant vaccinia viruses expressing the peptide epitope 3K or P-1K fused to the carboxyl termini of full length IAb (Vac:IAb-3K or Vac:IAb-P-1K) were constructed using standard techniques.
Mice were infected IP with 107 PFU Vac:IAb-3K or Vac:IAb-P-1K.
The 3K peptide is FEAQKAKANKAVD, numbered P-2 to P11, the P-1K peptide is FKAQKAKANKAVD.
 Calculation of G and G Free energy of binding (G) was calculated using the equation:  where R is the gas constant 1.987 cal/(mol*K) and T is Temperature in degrees Kelvin. To calculate the amount of binding energy contribution by a parental side chain, the free energy of the parental side chains was compared to an alanine substitution at the given position.
Thus, the parental side chains' contribution was determined as:  Crystallization and data collection J809.B5 TCR and IAb-3K proteins were mixed at 10 mg/ml each and crystallized by hanging-drop vapor diffusion at room temperature over 12% PEG 4000, 100mM sodium citrate and 100mM sodium cacodylate, at pH 5.0.
Crystals about 25m  25m  100m typically formed within a few days.
For data collection, crystals were transferred to crystallization buffer containing 25% (w/v) glycerol and were flash-cooled by plunging into liquid nitrogen.
X-ray diffraction data were collected from a single crystal at 100K using 1.10  radiation at the National Synchrotron Source X25 undulator beamline at Brookhaven National Laboratory.
Diffraction data were indexed, integrated, and scaled using HKL2000.
Unit cell parameters and data collection statistics are shown (Table S4).
See Supplemental data for structural determination and analysis.
Coordinates and structure factors for the J809.B5 TCR-IAb-3K complex will be available from the Protein Data Bank under accession number, 3RDT. Nomenclature and amino acid numbering Vs and Vs are named and their amino acids numbered according to the IUIS/Arden compilation.
 Supplementary Material This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication.
As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript.
The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form.
Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
 See Supplemental Data for additional Experimental Procedures.
 The authors declare no conflict of interest.
 REFERENCES Canonical structures for the hypervariable regions of T cell alphabeta receptors Mouse T-cell receptor variable gene segment families Binding of immunogenic peptides to Ia histocompatibility molecules Diverse TCRs recognize murine CD1 The CDR3 regions of an immunodominant T cell receptor dictate the 'energetic landscape' of peptide-MHC recognition Hard wiring of T cell receptor specificity for the major histocompatibility complex is underpinned by TCR adaptability How a single T cell receptor recognizes both self and foreign MHC High-resolution epitope mapping of hGH-receptor interactions by alanine-scanning mutagenesis Crossreactive T Cells spotlight the germline rules for alphabeta T cell-receptor interactions with MHC molecules T-cell antigen receptor genes and T-cell recognition  Increased frequency of T cell receptor V alpha 12.1 expression on CD8+ T cells: evidence that V alpha participates in shaping the peripheral T cell repertoire V beta 5+ T cell receptors skew toward OVA+H-2Kb recognition Two human T cell receptors bind in a similar diagonal mode to the HLA-A2/Tax peptide complex using different TCR amino acids Positive selection of thymocytes Correlations between T-cell specificity and the structure of the antigen receptor The molecular basis of TCR germline bias for MHC is surprisingly simple T-cell receptor variable region gene usage in T-cell populations Fast on-rates allow short dwell time ligands to activate T cells Allelic polymorphism in the T cell receptor and its impact on immune responses What do TCR-pMHC crystal structures teach us about MHC restriction and alloreactivity?
 Interface-disrupting amino acids establish specificity between T cell receptors and complexes of major histocompatibility complex and peptide How the T cell repertoire becomes peptide and MHC specific A T cell receptor V alpha region selectively expressed in CD4+ cells The somatic generation of immune recognition Mapping T-cell receptor-peptide contacts by variant peptide immunization of single-chain transgenics T cell tolerance by clonal elimination in the thymus Development and selection of T cells: facts and puzzles Effects of thymic selection of the T-cell repertoire on HLA class I-associated control of HIV infection How T cells `see' antigen Evolutionarily conserved amino acids that control TCR-MHC interaction Back to central tolerance Structure of an autoimmune T cell receptor complexed with class II peptide-MHC: insights into MHC bias and antigen specificity How many thymocytes audition for selection? Direct link between mhc polymorphism, T cell avidity, and diversity in immune defense Processing of X-ray Diffraction Data Collected in Oscillation Mode Differential recognition of CD1d-alpha-galactosyl ceramide by the V beta 8.2 and V beta 7 semi-invariant NKT T cell receptors The IMGT/HLA database How TCRs bind MHCs, peptides, and coreceptors Control of MHC restriction by TCR Valpha CDR1 and CDR2 T-cell receptor binding affinities and kinetics: impact on T-cell activity and specificity Structural determinants of T-cell receptor bias in immunity A semi-invariant Valpha10+ T cell antigen receptor defines a population of natural killer T cells with distinct glycolipid antigen-recognition properties Restricted use of T cell receptor V genes in murine autoimmune encephalomyelitis raises possibilities for antibody therapy Fixing an irrelevant TCR alpha chain reveals the importance of TCR beta diversity for optimal TCR alpha beta pairing and function of virus-specific CD8+ T cells Predominant use of a V alpha gene segment in mouse T-cell receptors for cytochrome c Structural alterations in peptide-MHC recognition by self-reactive T cell receptors A molecular basis for the exquisite CD1d-restricted antigen specificity and functional responses of natural killer T cells A Single T Cell Receptor Bound to Major Histocompatibility Complex Class I and Class II Glycoproteins Reveals Switchable TCR Conformers The MHC reactivity of the T cell repertoire prior to positive and negative selection CTL recognition of a protective immunodominant influenza A virus nucleoprotein epitope utilizes a highly restricted Vbeta but diverse Valpha repertoire: functional and structural implications Improved version of a human CD2 minigene based vector for T cell-specific expression in transgenic mice Restriction of in vitro T cell-mediated cytotoxicity in lymphocytic choriomeningitis within a syngeneic or semiallogeneic system Highlights MHCII-reactive TCRs can cross-react with classical and non-classical MHCI ligands Specific and cross-reactive TCRs bind MHCII with a conventional footprint MHC specific TCRs utilize divergent interactions to bind the same pMHC complexes Differential  TCR chain pairing can result in modified TCR-pMHC binding Development, expansion and TCR V gene family segregation of MHC specific and MHC cross-reactive T cells in YAe62 mice.
 (AF) Spleens from (A, D) MHCwt, (B, E) MHC CL2null, (C, F) MHCnull YAe62 were stained with (AC) IAb-3K or (DF) IAb-P-1K tetramers and for the expression of CD4, CD8, TCR.
Each of the three vertical panels show CD4 versus CD8 staining for splenocytes on the indicated MHC background followed by the IAb-3K or IAb-P-1K tetramer expression on the CD4 or CD8 T cells.
Data are representative of five independent experiments.
 (GL) MHCwt, MHC CL2null or MHCnull YAe62 mice were infected with (AC) Vac:IAb-3K, or (DF) Vac:IAb P-1K, and the CD4+ T cells (top row) and CD8+ T cells (bottom row) from infected mice were analyzed for the ability to be stained with IAb-3K or IAb-P-1K tetramer.
Data are representative of five to eight mice per group.
 (MR) MHCwt, MHC CL2null and MHCnull YAe62 mice were infected with (GI) Vac:IAb-3K, or (JL) Vac:IAb-P-1K, and the expanded IAb-3K and IAb-P-1K tetramer positive, CD4+ T cells were analyzed for V family usage.
V2+ IAb-3K and IAb-P-1K reactive T cells (top row) are enriched in MHCwt mice, and absent in MHC CL2null mice.
V11+ IAb-3K and IAb-P-1K T cells (bottom row) are enriched in MHC CL2null mice and absent in MHCwt and MHCnull mice.
Data are representative of five independent experiments.
 MHC cross-reactive TCRs are self-reactive, have different MHC cross-reactivities, yet have overlapping TCR-pMHC equilibrium affinities with MHC specific TCRs.
 (AD) The IAb-3K reactive T cell hybridomas (A) YAe62, (B) 4.A5 (isolated from an MHC CL2null mouse) and (C) J809.B5 (isolated from an MHCwt mouse) and the (D) IAb-P-1K-reactive T cell hybridoma J210.A3 (isolated from an MHCwt mouse) were stimulated with either antigen presenting cells (APC) expressing no MHC, IAb presenting 3K or P-1K, or IAb presenting endogenous self peptides.
Data are average of triplicate wells and are representative of two experiments.
 (EH) The (E) YAe62, (F) 4.A5, (G) J809.B5 or (H) J210.A3 TCRs were expressed on the surface in SF9 cells and stained with IAb-3K or IAb-P-1K tetramer, and CD1d-PBS57 tetramer.
Shaded histogram is a negative control tetramer.
Data are representative example of three independent experiments.
 (IL) Soluble (I) YAe62, (J) 4.A5, (K) J809.B5 or (L) J210.A3 TCRs were analyzed for equilibrium binding to immobilized IAb-3K or IAb-P-1K using SPR.
Sensograms are representative of two independent analyses.
 Energetic Footprint of MHC cross-reactive TCRs and MHC specific TCRs.
 (AE) MHC side chain contribution for binding relative to wild type IAb-3K for the (A) YAe62 TCR, (B,C) 4A5, 4A6 (V11+ TCRs), (DE) 4A3, 4B1 (V5+ TCRs) isolated from MHC CL2null YAe62 mice.
 (FH) MHC side chain contribution of binding relative to wild type IAb-3K for the J809.B5, J809.G3, or J809.H1, (V2+ TCRs) isolated from MHCwt YAe62 mice.
 Individual IAb-3K alanine substitutions covering the potential TCR binding surface were made in the IAb chain, IAb chain and 3K peptide (see Figure S5).
G >1.5 kcal/mol are colored red, G = 0.71.5 kcal/mol colored yellow, G <0.7 kcal/mol are colored light gray.
The peptide residues are outlined in black.
Data are averages of three independent measurements.
 TCR pairings that create MHC specific TCRs change the binding energetics of the YAe62 chain at IAb -chain residues Q61 and Q57.
 (AD) The (A) YAe62, (B) J809.B5, (C) J809.G3 and (D) J809.H1 TCRs and each TCR carrying alanine substitutions at Y48, Y46 and E54 were expressed on insect cells and stained with IAb-3K tetramer.
Data are percent loss of tetramer binding as compared to the wild type TCRs.
Data for the TCR substitution mutations are the average of at least three experiments.
Error bars are the standard error of the independent experiments.
 (EH) The G of (A) YAe62, (B) J809.B5, (C) J809.G3 and (D) J809.H1 TCRs binding IAb-3K carrying alanine substitutions at IAb Q57, Q61 and K39.
The G values are those measured by SPR (Q57 to A, Q61 to A, Table S1) or calculated from TCR multimer staining (K39 to A, Figure S5).
 MHC cross-reactive and MHC specific TCRs bind IAb-3K within a similar footprint.
 (A) Overlay of YAe62 and J809.B5 TCRs binding IAb-3K.
The YAe62 TCR is colored red (TCR) and blue (TCR); the J809.B5 TCR is colored green (TCR) and orange (TCR).
IAb-3K is colored cyan (IAb chain), yellow (peptide) and magenta (IAb chain).
 (B, C) Projection of IAb-3K binding onto the (B) YAe62 TCR, or (C) J809.B5 TCR.
Contacts with the IAb chain (colored cyan), peptide (colored yellow) and the IAb chain (colored magenta).
Black line demarcates border of the TCR subunit from the TCR subunit.
 (D, E) Projection of the (D) YAe62 TCR or (E) J809.B5 TCR binding onto IAb-3K.
YAe62 TCR contacts are colored blue, YAe62 TCR contacts are colored red.
The J809.B5 TCR contacts are colored orange and the TCR contacts are colored yellow.
The peptide residues are outlined in black.
 (FI) The amount of Buried Surface Area (BSA) contributed by the (F) YAe62 or (G) J809.B5 TCR and TCR loops to the binding reaction with IAb-3K.
(H) The amount of BSA contributed by the peptide or MHC chains for the binding reaction with YAe62 TCR or the (I) J809.B5 TCR.
Figures were made using PyMol (DeLano).
 The J809.B5 TCR chain induces a TCR rigid body movement and replaces the YAe62 TCR contacts to MHC with TCR contacts to the peptide.
 (A) A rigid body movement rotates the J809.B5 TCR chain 12  towards the peptide; J809.B5 TCR (green), J809.B5 TCR (orange), YAe62 (red) and YAe62 (blue).
 (B) The YAe62 CDR1 Y29 (blue) contacts IAb T77 and H81 whereas as the J809.B5 CDR1 (orange) makes no contact with the IAb chain.
 (C) The J809.B5 CDR3 (orange) makes extensive contacts with the P-1E and P3K residues of the peptide whereas the YAe62 CDR3 (blue) makes very few.
Salt bridge (black arrow) and hydrogen bonds (red dashed lines) between J809.B5 CDR3 and the 3K peptide are shown.
Figures were made using PyMol (DeLano).
 TCR chains can induce a conformational change to the TCR CDR3 loop.
 (A) The J809.B5 chain (green) is in an altered conformation as compared to the identical CDR3 chain within the YAe62 TCR (red).
The J809.B5 CDR3 chain creates a hydrogen bond (red dashed lines) with J809.B5 CDR1 Y31, CDR2 R50 and a Van der Waals contact (red arrow) with CDR3 JA96.
 (B, C) Within the (B) YAe62 TCR an internal hydrogen bond is created between CDR3 D93 and the main chain of T98.
This internal hydrogen bond is absent within the J809.B5 TCR.
 (D) The MHC cross-reactive and MHC specific TCRs and each TCR carrying alanine substitutions at D93, F94 and W95 were expressed on insect cells and stained with IAb-3K tetramer.
The MHC cross-reactive TCRs (red bars) are displayed in the order: YAe62, 4.A3, 4.B1, 4.A5 and 4.A6.
The MHC specific TCRs (green bars) are displayed in the order: J809.B5, J809.G3 and J809.H1.
Data are percent loss of tetramer binding as compared to the wild type TCRs.
Data for the TCR substitution mutations are the average of at least three experiments.
Error bars are the standard error of the independent experiments.
 
