Structural basis of recognition of farnesylated and  methylated KRAS4b by PDE  Srisathiyanarayanan Dharmaiaha  , Lakshman Bindua  , Timothy H. Trana  , William K. Gillettea  , Peter H. Franka  ,  Rodolfo Ghirlandob  , Dwight V. Nissleya  , Dominic Espositoa  , Frank McCormicka,c,1, Andrew G. Stephena  ,  and Dhirendra K. Simanshua,1  a  NCI RAS Initiative, Cancer Research Technology Program, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick,  MD 21701; b  Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD  20892; and c  Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158  Contributed by Frank McCormick, September 14, 2016 (sent for review April 29, 2016; reviewed by Mark Philips and Carla Mattos)  Farnesylation and carboxymethylation of KRAS4b (Kirsten rat sarcoma  isoform 4b) are essential for its interaction with the plasma membrane  where KRAS-mediated signaling events occur.
Phosphodiesterase-  (PDE) binds to KRAS4b and plays an important role in targeting it  to cellular membranes.
We solved structures of human farnesylated  methylated KRAS4b in complex with PDE in two different crystal  forms.
In these structures, the interaction is driven by the C-terminal  amino acids together with the farnesylated and methylated C185 of  KRAS4b that binds tightly in the central hydrophobic pocket present in  PDE.
In crystal form II, we see the full-length structure of farnesylated  methylated KRAS4b, including the hypervariable region.
Crystal  form I reveals structural details of farnesylatedmethylated KRAS4b  binding to PDE, and crystal form II suggests the potential binding  mode of geranylgeranylatedmethylated KRAS4b to PDE.
We identified a 5-aa-long sequence motif (Lys-Ser-Lys-Thr-Lys) in KRAS4b  that may enable PDE to bind both forms of prenylated KRAS4b.  Structure and sequence analysis of various prenylated proteins that  have been previously tested for binding to PDE provides a rationale  for why some prenylated proteins, such as KRAS4a, RalA, RalB, and  Rac1, do not bind to PDE.
Comparison of all four available structures  of PDE complexed with various prenylated proteins/peptides shows  the presence of additional interactions due to a larger proteinprotein  interaction interface in KRAS4bPDE complex.
This interface might be  exploited for designing an inhibitor with minimal off-target effects.
  prenylation | proteinprotein interaction | KRAS4b | KRASPDE complex |  phosphodiesterase-  RAS mutations are found in one-third of all human cancers (1).
  Three RAS genes in humans encode four distinct but highly  homologous RAS proteins: HRAS, NRAS, and the splice variants  KRAS4a (Kirsten rat sarcoma isoform 4a) and KRAS4b (2).
Among  the three RAS isoforms, KRAS is the most commonly mutated gene  in the RAS family and involved in 95% of pancreatic cancers and a  high proportion of colorectal and lung cancers (3).
RAS proteins  function as molecular switches by alternating between inactive GDPbound and active GTP-bound states (46).
The active or inactive  state of RAS proteins is regulated by guanine nucleotide exchange  factors and GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) (79).
In the GTPbound state, RAS proteins interact with a variety of effector proteins,  such as Raf, PI3K, and RalGDS, leading to activation of several  signaling cascades within the cell (10, 11).
Oncogenic RAS mutations  are predominantly found at amino acid positions G12, G13, and Q61  and impair intrinsic and GAP-mediated GTPase function (12).
  RAS isoforms contain a highly conserved GTPase domain (G  domain) and diverge substantially in the last 20 amino acids at the  C-terminal end known as the hypervariable region (HVR) (10, 13).
  This region contains residues that undergo posttranslational  modifications essential for targeting RAS proteins to the cytosolic  leaflet of cellular membranes.
All RAS proteins are farnesylated  and carboxymethylated at the Cys residue present in the C-terminal  CaaX motif, where a is an aliphatic amino acid and X is any amino  acid.
The terminal amino acid (X) determines the nature of the  prenylated lipid chain.
A leucine residue as X results in geranylgeranylation, and all other residues result in farnesylation (14).
  NRAS, HRAS, and KRAS4a are additionally modified by one or  two palmitic acids on Cys residues located upstream of the CaaX  motif.
KRAS4b does not undergo palmitoylation.
Instead, it has a  polybasic region formed by a stretch of lysines that are believed to  interact with negatively charged head groups of plasma membrane  lipids (15).
RAS proteins are further processed by RCE1 (RAS  converting CaaX endopeptidase 1) (16), which removes the -aaX  residues, followed by ICMT (isoprenylcysteine carboxyl methyltransferase) (17), which adds a methyl group on the carboxyl group  of the C-terminal prenylated Cys.
Almost two decades ago, RAS  farnesyltransferase inhibitors (FTIs) were intensively explored in  clinical trials, but because of alternative prenylation (geranylgeranylation) of KRAS and to a lesser extent, NRAS by geranylgeranyl transferases in the presence of FTIs, their high preclinical  anticancer activity could not be translated into clinical efficacy (18,  19).
Tumors driven by mutation of HRAS, which can only be  farnesylated, are sensitive to FTIs, at least in preclinical models.
  Phosphodiesterase- (PDE; also known as PDE6, PrBP/, and  PDE6D) was initially identified as the noncatalytic -subunit of  photoreceptor PDE6.
It was later implicated in membrane release  and localization of prenylated RAS and other prenylated proteins  (2023).
PDE has been shown to sequester KRAS4b from the  cytosol by binding the prenylated HVR, thus preventing it from  Significance  Despite the significant progress made in the last few years  toward targeting phosphodiesterase- (PDE) for KRAS (Kirsten  rat sarcoma isoform)-driven cancers, there is no structural information available on posttranslationally modified KRAS4b in  complex with PDE.
The KRAS4bPDE structure reported here  provides the structural details of the proteinprotein interaction  interface and the atomic details of the hypervariable region of  KRAS4b.
Structural comparison of the two crystal forms allowed  identification of a 5-aa-long sequence motif in KRAS4b that could  allow PDE to bind to both farnesylated and geranylgeranylated  KRAS4b.
Structural insights obtained from this study could be  used to guide the development of improved and more specific  inhibitors of the KRAS4bPDE complex.
  Author contributions: D.V.N., F.M., A.G.S., and D.K.S. designed research; S.D., L.B., T.H.T., P.H.F.,  R.G., and D.K.S. performed research; W.K.G., R.G., and D.E. contributed new reagents/  analytic tools; F.M., A.G.S., and D.K.S. analyzed data; and D.K.S. wrote the paper.
  Reviewers: C.M., Northeastern University; and M.P., New York University School of  Medicine.  The authors declare no conflict of interest.
  Data deposition: The atomic coordinates and structure factors have been deposited in the  Protein Data Bank, www.pdb.org (PDB ID codes 5TB5 and 5TAR).
  1  To whom correspondence may be addressed.
Email: frank.mccormick@ucsf.edu or  dhirendra.simanshu@fnlcr.nih.gov.
  This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
  1073/pnas.1615316113/-/DCSupplemental.
  www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1615316113 PNAS Early Edition | 1 of 10  BIOCHEMISTRY PNAS PLUSbinding to extensive endomembrane surfaces and thereby, enhancing its diffusion throughout the cell.
KRAS4b is then released  in perinuclear membranes by the release factors Arl2 and Arl3,  where it binds the recycling endosome and is delivered to the  plasma membrane via vesicular transport (24, 25).
Binding of either  GTP-bound Arl2/3 or prenylated RAS to PDE has been suggested  to be mutually exclusive (26).
Biochemical and cellular studies have  shown that the interaction between PDE and KRAS4b is independent of its nucleotide (GTP/GDP) status (27).
  The structure of PDE in a complex with fully modified Rheb  (a member of the RAS subfamily) has been solved (26).
Unlike  KRAS4b, Rheb has a smaller HVR with a different amino acid  composition and lacks the polybasic region.
In this structure, the  C-terminal farnesyl chain of Rheb is present in a hydrophobic  pocket within the Ig-like -sandwich fold of PDE, with three  amino acids upstream of the prenylated cysteine interacting with  PDE.
Based on these studies, a high-throughput screen followed  by a rational structure-based design approach resulted in the development of deltarasin as an inhibitor of the KRAS4bPDE  interaction (28).
Deltarasin binds inside the hydrophobic pocket of  PDE with low nanomolar affinity in vitro as well as in vivo.
  Cellular studies with adenopancreatic cancer cells showed that  addition of 5 M deltarasin blocks RAS signaling, reduces  proliferation, and causes cell death in KRAS-dependent cells,  whereas minimal effects were observed in KRAS-independent cells  (28).
Additionally, the administration of deltarasin to nude mice  bearing s.c. xenografts of human Panc-Tu-I tumors caused a dosedependent reduction of tumor growth.
Overall, these results showed  that PDE could be a potential target, and deltarasin and other  small molecules represent a platform for finding better and more  specific inhibitors of the KRAS4bPDE complex.
  Despite significant progress made in the last few years in  identifying and targeting PDE for KRAS-driven cancers, there  is no structural information available on fully processed KRAS4b  in complex with PDE.
In this paper, we describe structures of  farnesylatedmethylated KRAS4b (KRAS4b-FMe) in complex  with PDE in two different crystal forms.
Our structures provide  atomic details of the HVR of KRAS4b in complex with PDE.
  Comparison of the two crystal forms describes not only how  KRAS4b-FMe binds to PDE but also, how binding of prenylated KRAS4b and PDE is likely to be facilitated by the presence of a 5-aa-long sequence motif in the HVR of KRAS4b.
The  conserved sequence of this motif may account for the binding of  PDE to both forms of prenylated KRAS4b.
Finally, structurebased mutational studies suggest key roles played by various  amino acids involved in the KRAS4bPDE interaction.
  Results  The Role of Farnesyl and Methyl Groups in Interactions Between  KRAS4b and PDE.
To understand the role of farnesylation and  carboxymethylation of C185 of KRAS4b (Fig. 1A) in its interaction  with PDE, we characterized the interaction of farnesylated KRAS4b  (KRAS4b-Far) and KRAS4b-FMe with PDE using sedimentation  velocity analytical ultracentrifugation (SV-AUC) and isothermal  titration calorimetry (ITC).
Sedimentation velocity studies on PDE,  KRAS4b-FMe, and KRAS4b-Far showed the presence of a single  species with sedimentation coefficients of 1.90 S, 2.25 S, and 2.24 S,  respectively (Fig. 1B).
The best fit molar masses of 18  1 kDa for  PDE, 22.9  0.5 kDa for KRAS4b-FMe, and 22.9  0.6 kDa for  KRAS4b-Far show that these species are monomers in solution.
To  characterize the interaction of PDE with KRAS4b-FMe, solutions  containing approximately equimolar amounts of these two species  were studied at different concentrations.
The c(s) profiles (sedimentation coefficient distributions) obtained indicate the formation of a high-affinity 1:1 complex (Fig. S1A).
At the highest  concentration, the predominant species observed has a sedimentation coefficient of 2.92 S and estimated molar mass of 36   3 kDa.
As the concentration was reduced, the relative proportion  of complex decreased, and based on the c(s) profiles, it seems that  the complex is in fast exchange with the free species (Fig. S1A).
To  determine the affinity of the interaction, a weighted average sedimentation coefficient obtained by integration of the c(s) distribution was used to construct an sw isotherm and fit to a model  describing an A + B = AB interaction (Fig. 1C).
The dissociation  constant, Kd, was determined to be 1.8  0.6 M. Similar experiments characterizing the interaction of PDE with KRAS4b-Far led  to c(s) profiles indicative of a much weaker interaction (Fig. S1B),  with a significant proportion of uncomplexed material at the highest  concentrations studied.
The weak association was confirmed in an  analysis of the sw isotherm, which returned an estimated dissociation  constant Kd of 130  15 M (Fig. 1C).
A similar trend was observed  when we measured dissociation constants (Kd) of PDE with  KRAS4b-Far and KRAS4b-FMe using ITC.
ITC measurements  showed a weak binding affinity with a Kd of 82  9 M between  Fig. 1.
Carboxymethylation of farnesylated C185 is important for KRAS4b  PDE interaction.
(A) Amino acid sequence of the HVR of KRAS4b showing the  presence of a polylysine patch and farnesylated and carboxymethylated C185  at the C terminus.
(B) Normalized absorbance c(s) profiles for PDE (15 M;  blue), KRAS4b-FMe (28 M; red), and KRAS4b-Far (40 M; green) in SV-AUC  experiments show that these three proteins are monomers.
Similar profiles  were observed using the interference optical detection system.
(C) Weighted  absorbance sedimentation coefficient isotherms based on c(s) profiles for PDE  and KRAS4b-FMe (blue) and PDE and KRAS4b-Far (red).
Data were globally  modeled in terms of an A + B = AB heteroassociation model, as described in  the text, to yield the best fit shown.
(D and E) ITC titration experiments to  measure the dissociation constant (D) between KRAS4b-Far and PDE and  (E) between KRAS4b-FMe and PDE.
The DP is a measured differential power  between the reference cell and the sample cell.
  2 of 10 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1615316113 Dharmaiah et al.KRAS4b-Far and PDE (Fig. 1D), whereas the presence of both  farnesyl and methyl groups on KRAS4b led to a relatively stronger  binding with a Kd of 2.3  0.3 M (Fig. 1E).
These results show that  the presence of both the methyl and farnesyl modifications increases  the affinity between KRAS4b and PDE close to two orders of  magnitude compared with only KRAS4b-Far.
Previous studies using  a fluorescencepolarization (FP) assay showed a 10-fold higher  binding affinity (Kd = 0.3 M) between KRAS4b and PDE (29).
  This discrepancy is likely caused by the use of different techniques  (analytical ultracentrifugation and ITC vs. FP), different assay conditions, and the use of semisynthetic and refolded KRAS4b vs.  recombinant fully processed KRAS4b that we used for this study.
  Structures of KRAS4b-FMe in Complex with PDE in Two Crystal  Forms.
We attempted to crystallize KRAS4b-Far as well as  KRAS4b-FMe in complex with PDE and were successful in  crystallizing only the latter protein in complex with PDE in two  different crystal forms referred to as crystal forms I and II (Fig. 2  and Table S1).
In crystal form I, the asymmetric unit contains two  molecules of KRAS4bPDE complex, with PDE interacting  with the last five residues located upstream of farnesylated  methylated C185 of KRAS4b.
In this structure, we did not observe  interpretable electron density for three to five amino acids (172  176 or 174176) in the HVR in two KRAS4bPDE complexes  present in the asymmetric unit, indicating flexibility in these residues inside the crystal (Fig. 2A and Fig. S2A).
In crystal form II,  the asymmetric unit contained only one molecule of KRAS4b  PDE complex, where we see the electron density for the entire  HVR of KRAS4b (Fig. S2B).
In this crystal form, the C-terminal  helix is extended and includes HVR residues up to K180, including  six lysine residues (175180) present in the polybasic region.
Unlike crystal form I, in crystal form II, only three terminal residues of  KRAS4b located upstream of farnesylatedmethylated C185 were  involved in complex formation.
In crystal form II, most of the  residues present in the HVR that were not involved in complex  formation formed a long helical secondary structure (Fig. 2B).
  Secondary structure propensity analysis for residues present in  HVR indicates that most of the residues have the tendency to  form or favor -helical structure (Fig. S2C).
  In neither crystal form did we observe any specific interaction  between the GTPase domain of KRAS4b and PDE (Fig. S2D),  which provides a rationale for the broad specificity of PDE for  prenylated proteins and also explains why the KRAS4bPDE interaction is independent of the KRAS4b nucleotide (GDP/GTP)  status.
Although within the crystal, the GTPase domain of KRAS4b  interacts with symmetry-related PDE molecules, these interactions  are minimal and differ in the two crystal forms, implying that they are  nonspecific and limited to crystal contact only.
The overall structure  and conformation of the switch I and II regions of KRAS4b resemble  previously solved structures of KRAS4bGDP complexes.
In crystal  form I, no electron density was observed for the switch I region.
  Comparison of the interaction between KRAS4b and PDE in  these two crystal forms suggests two different modes of binding  between these two proteins (Fig. 2 and Fig. S2D).
Unlike crystal  form II, in crystal form I, HVR residues as well as farnesyl and  methyl groups go deep inside the PDE hydrophobic pocket,  presumably resulting in stronger interaction between these two  proteins.
We will first describe the stronger interaction observed  between these two proteins in crystal form I and then, compare it  with crystal form II.
  Interaction of the HVR Residues of KRAS4b with PDE in Crystal Form I.  Residues present in the HVR.
In crystal form I, KRAS4b interacts with  PDE through the C-terminal amino acids S181, K182, T183,  K184, and farnesylatedmethylated C185 (Fig. 3 A and B).
Residue K184 forms multiple hydrogen bonds with main chain atoms  of PDE residues I53, L54, and C56 (Fig. 3B and Fig. S3A).
Side  chain oxygen and main chain oxygen/nitrogen atoms of T183 form  hydrogen bonds with residues E88 and Y149 from PDE.
The side  chain of K182 points toward the surface and does not form any  hydrogen bonds with PDE residues, but the main chain nitrogen  atom of K182 forms a hydrogen bond with E88 from PDE.
  Residue S181 forms three hydrogen bonds with PDE via side  chain oxygen atom with E88 and via main chain atoms with E110  and A112 from PDE.
The HVR residue K180 present near the  entry gate forms no hydrogen bonds with any PDE residues but  does form relatively weak van der Waals and hydrophobic interactions with residues W90, E110, A111, and A112 of PDE (Fig.  3B and Fig. S3A).
  We carried out structure-based mutational studies to examine  the role of the HVR residues in the interaction between KRAS4b  and PDE.
A double mutant of KRAS4b, T183A and K184E, was  expressed and purified in the farnesylatedmethylated form and  showed weaker binding by two orders of magnitude, indicating  that the composition of residues present upstream of C185 also  plays a key role in the interaction between KRAS4b and PDE  (Fig. 3C).
We also mutated S181 to alanine and glutamate and all  four terminal residues from S181-K184 to alanine, but these three  KRAS4b mutants could only be isolated in the farnesylated form  (but not methylated) in our engineered insect cell expression  system for reasons that remain to be determined.
In these cases,  we compared Kd values obtained on mutants with KRAS4b-Far.
  Farnesylated S181A and SKTK(181184)AAAA showed slightly  weaker binding to PDE compared with WT KRAS4b-Far, suggesting  Fig. 2.
Overall structure of KRAS4bPDE complex in two different crystal  forms.
(A) Ribbon representation of GDP-bound KRAS4b-FMe in complex with  PDE in crystal form I. (B) Ribbon representation of GDP-bound KRAS4b-FMe in  complex with PDE in crystal form II.
The PDE, GTPase domain, and HVR of  KRAS4b are shown in green, cyan, and red, respectively.
The farnesyl chain is  shown as spheres and colored yellow.
The carbon and oxygen atoms of carboxymethyl group are colored magenta and red, respectively.
GDP is shown as  a stick and colored yellow (carbon) and red (oxygen).
  Dharmaiah et al. PNAS Early Edition | 3 of 10  BIOCHEMISTRY PNAS PLUSthat smaller aliphatic residues are tolerated at these positions  (Fig. 3D and Fig. S3B).
Unlike farnesylated S181A, farnesylated  S181E mutant showed much weaker binding with PDE, indicating  that the presence of a larger and acidic amino acid at residue 181  affects KRAS4b binding to PDE (Fig. S3C).
Overall, these studies  showed that mutations of the HVR residues located upstream of  C185 to small aliphatic amino acid, such as alanine, are tolerated but  any drastic mutation to bulky and acidic amino acids, such as glutamate, severely affects the interaction between these two proteins.
  Farnesylated and methylated C185.
The farnesyl and methyl groups  attached to C185 of KRAS4b bind in a hydrophobic pocket  formed by 23 PDE residues, consisting mainly of Phe, Ile, Leu,  Trp, Val, Met, and Ala (Fig. 4A).
There are five phenylalanine  residues, each present on individual -strands that line the bottom  of the hydrophobic pocket (Fig. 4A).
Among these residues, F133  comes closest to the tail end of the farnesyl chain and forms hydrophobic interactions with terminal carbon atoms of the farnesyl  chain.
Residue W90 of PDE is located at the entry point of the  pocket and expected to play a role in the entry of the HVR into  the hydrophobic tunnel.
Other aliphatic amino acids, such as Ile,  Leu, Val, and Ala, of PDE position themselves around the aliphatic carbon atoms of the farnesyl chain to provide a hydrophobic environment when KRAS4b is trafficking inside the  hydrophilic milieu of the cytoplasm (Fig. 4A).
The carboxymethyl  group of C185 binds at another pocket formed by PDE residues  W90, F92, and I109.
Residues R61 and Q78 of PDE are located  close to this pocket and provide a polar environment for the  carboxymethyl group of C185 (Fig. 4B).
  To understand the role of various PDE residues in the interaction with the farnesyl and methyl groups of KRAS4b, we  selected eight different PDE residues based on the KRAS4b  PDE complex structure (F15, M20, W32, E88, W90, Q116, I129,  and F133) and mutated those individually to alanine (Fig. 4C and  Fig. S4A).
We measured the dissociation constants (Kd) of these  eight PDE mutants with KRAS4b-FMe using ITC.
Surprisingly,  most of these mutants could bind to KRAS4b-FMe with close to  WT affinity, suggesting that single-amino acid substitutions of  these amino acids into alanine do not substantially affect the interaction between KRAS4b and PDE (Fig. 4C and Fig. S4 BH).
  Only the E88A mutation showed fivefold weaker binding to  KRAS4b-FMe (Fig. 4D).
Examination of the interactions mediated by E88 shows formation of multiple hydrogen bonds with side  chain atoms of S181 and main chain atoms of T183, supporting  the weaker binding for this point mutant (Fig. 4E).
  Comparison of Two Crystal Forms Suggests Two Possible Binding  Modes Between Prenylated KRAS4b and PDE.
Structural superposition of the two crystal forms suggests two different binding  modes between KRAS4b and PDE.
Compared with crystal form  I, the HVR residues in crystal form II are shifted upstream by two  amino acids at the KRAS4bPDE interface, and thus, only the  last three amino acids of the HVR and prenylated C185 of  KRAS4b interact with PDE (Fig. 5 A and B).
Although it seems  surprising at first that, even after shifting two amino acids, the  HVR can still form a similar interaction with PDE residues, this  can be explained by the fact that, in crystal form II, residues K182-  T183-K184 occupy the same positions as those of residues K180-  S181-K182 in crystal form I (Fig. 5 B and C).
The methyl group of  C185 in crystal form II occupies the same position as that of the  side chain atoms of T183 in crystal form I. Consequently, in crystal  form II, the farnesyl chain partially occupies the hydrophobic  pocket of PDE, with the remainder of the empty space packed by  conformational changes in the side chain atoms of F133 (Fig. 5B).
  Structural superposition of two crystal forms indicates that the  hydrophobic pocket of PDE in crystal form II can accommodate  an additional five carbon atoms if F133 occupies the same rotamer  conformation as seen in crystal form I (Figs. 5B and 6A).
Previous  studies have shown that, when farnesyl transferase inhibitors block  farnesylation, KRAS4b undergoes alternative prenylation and is  geranylgeranylated by geranylgeranyl transferase (19).
The farnesyl chain is 15-carbon atoms long, whereas the geranylgeranyl  chain has an additional five carbons attached to it.
Structural superposition of the two crystal forms indicates there is space for  these additional 5-carbon atoms in the hydrophobic pocket, thus  indicating that the 20-carbon-long geranylgeranyl chain would also  fit in this pocket (Figs. 5B and 6A).
  Crystal Form II Mimics GeranylgeranylatedMethylated KRAS4b  Binding to PDE.
Because crystal form II mimics a possible binding mode of geranylgeranylatedmethylated KRAS4b (KRAS4bGGMe) with PDE, we modeled the structure of KRAS4b-GGMe  in complex with PDE using this structure (Fig. 6B).
To allow  the geranylgeranyl chain to bind in the hydrophobic pocket, we  changed the rotamer conformation of side chain atoms of F133 to  the conformation observed in crystal form I. Modeled structures  showed an ideal fit for a geranylgeranyl chain in the hydrophobic  pocket, with the last three HVR residues mimicking a similar  Fig. 3.
Details of intermolecular proteinprotein interactions in KRAS4b  PDE complex and impact of mutation of the HVR residues on KRAS4bPDE  interaction.
(A) Sliced view of an electrostatic representation of PDE showing  the region where the HVR residues (colored cyan) bind and a central hydrophobic pocket that accommodates farnesylated (colored yellow and shown in  stick representation) and methylated C185 (colored cyan and shown in stick  representation).
(B) Intermolecular hydrogen bonding contacts involving residues from the HVR of KRAS4b and PDE.
Residues from PDE and KRAS4b are  shown in stick representation and colored green and cyan, respectively.
The  farnesyl and methyl groups are shown in stick representation and colored  yellow and magenta, respectively.
Dashed black lines indicate intermolecular  hydrogen bonds.
(C) ITC titration experiments to measure the dissociation  constant between farnesylatedmethylated double mutant (T183A-K184E) of  KRAS4b and WT PDE.
(D) ITC titration experiments to measure the dissociation constant between farnesylated quadruple mutant (S181A-K182A-T183AK184A) of KRAS4b and WT PDE.
This mutant could only be expressed and  purified in farnesylated form in our engineered insect cell expression system.
  DP, differential power.
  4 of 10 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1615316113 Dharmaiah et al.interaction with PDE as observed in crystal form II (Fig. 6B).
  Recently, the structure of PDE in complex with geranylgeranylated  methylated peptide from PDE6 was reported (30).
Comparison of  this structure with our modeled structure of KRAS4b-GGMe in  complex with PDE shows a similar position of the geranylgeranyl  chain inside the hydrophobic pocket and similar HVR residues  (KSKT in PDE6 vs. KSKTK in KRAS4b) upstream of the prenylated Cys, differing mainly in the position of the carboxymethyl group  likely because of different penultimate residues in these two proteins  (Fig. 6C).
  Comparison Between KRAS4bPDE and RhebPDE Structures.
A  structural comparison of KRAS4bPDE and RhebPDE complexes revealed that neither KRAS4b nor Rheb interact with PDE  via the GTPase domain (26), providing a rationale for the observed  broad specificity of PDE to other members of the RAS superfamily.
Along with this similarity, we observed a few significant  differences between these two complexes.
Unlike Rheb, the farnesyl  and methyl groups in KRAS4b bind deeper inside the hydrophobic  pocket of PDE in crystal form I (Fig. S5 A and B).
In addition, the  methyl groups present at the farnesylated cysteine in these two  structures point in opposite directions with respect to the HVR.
In  the RhebPDE complex, the methyl group occupies the same  position as that of K184 in the KRAS4bPDE complex.
Furthermore, in the RhebPDE complex, only three HVR residues  and the prenylated cysteine interact with PDE (26), whereas in the  KRAS4bPDE complex (crystal form I), the last four residues and  prenylated cysteine interact with PDE (Fig. S5B).
Additional interactions in the case of KRAS4b are facilitated by large movements of  side chain atoms of W90 at the entry point and F133 at the bottom  of the hydrophobic pocket in PDE (Fig. S5B).
The position of the  farnesyl chain in crystal form II matches that of the farnesyl chain in  the RhebPDE structure (Fig. S5 C and D).
However, the position  of the methyl group and interactions between the HVR and PDE  residues differ in these two structures.
  Identification of a Conserved Sequence Motif in KRAS4b and Its Role in  Facilitating Binding of Prenylated KRAS4b to PDE.
The two different  modes of binding observed in our crystal structures are possible  because of the presence of a unique 5-aa-long sequence motif  KSKTK present in KRAS4b (Fig. 6D).
This motif maintains many  KRAS4bPDE interactions in the crystal form II, even when the  HVR residues shift upstream by two amino acids at the protein  protein interaction interface.
Sequence analysis of KRAS HVR  Fig. 4.
Recognition of farnesylated and carboxymethylated C185 of KRAS4b by PDE and impact of mutation of PDE residues on KRAS4bPDE interaction.
  (A) Nonpolar residues (colored green; stick representation) of PDE form a hydrophobic pocket that accommodates the farnesyl chain (colored yellow; ball  and stick representation) and carboxymethyl group (magenta and cyan; ball and stick representation).
(B) Stereo view of the PDE pocket formed by residues  (colored green; stick) that accommodates the carboxymethyl group (colored magenta and cyan; ball and stick) of farnesylated C185 (colored yellow; ball and  stick).
(C) Dissociation constant of PDE mutants with KRAS4b-FMe measured using ITC titration experiments.
(D) ITC titration experiments to measure the  dissociation constant between PDEE88A mutant and KRAS4b-FMe.
(E) Intermolecular hydrogen bonds formed by PDE residue E88 (colored green; stick)  with HVR residues (colored cyan; stick).
DP, differential power.  Dharmaiah et al. PNAS Early Edition | 5 of 10  BIOCHEMISTRY PNAS PLUSresidues in other organisms showed the presence of similar motifs  that were compatible with binding of prenylated KRAS with PDE  (Fig. 6D).
This prenylated KRAS recognition motif contains  large basic amino acids (Lys or Arg) at first, third, and fifth positions and smaller polar amino acids (Ser or Thr) at second and  fourth positions.
Interactions formed at the KRASPDE interface by the first three amino acids (first, second, and third) of this  motif when KRAS is farnesylated would overlap with the last three  amino acids (third, fourth, and fifth) present in this motif when  KRAS is geranylgeranylated.
Thus, conservation of this sequence  motif in the KRAS4b sequences of many organisms indicates  that PDE could bind to KRAS4b in both farnesylated and  geranylgeranylated forms.
  Structure-Based Sequence Analysis of PDE Binding Proteins.
Previous  studies have shown that a large repertoire of prenyl proteins, such  as subunits of PDE6, GRK1, GRK7, Rab13, Rap1a, Rap2b,  RhoA, RhoB, Rnd1, Rap2c, RasD2, and Reb-L1, bind to PDE  (20, 22, 27, 3133).
Among RAS proteins, in addition to KRAS4b,  NRAS and HRAS have also been shown to bind to PDE (20, 27).
  However, there have been some discrepancies in the literature on  HRAS binding to PDE.
Nancy et al. (27) showed that HRAS  binds to PDE, but this observation could not be corroborated by  later studies from two different groups (20, 31).
Unlike many other  prenylated members of RAS superfamily, KRAS4a, RalA, RalB,  and Rac1 do not bind to PDE (27, 31, 34).
To understand how  PDE binds to a large number of prenylated proteins and why  some prenylated proteins do not bind to PDE, we carried out  structure-based sequence analysis using available structures of  PDE in complex with prenylated proteins or peptides.
Structural  superposition of PDE in complex with the prenylated proteins  KRAS4b and Rheb (26) and prenylated peptides from PDE6  (30) and INPP5E (35) showed that prenylated Cys occupies different positions in these complexes and PDE interacts with three  or four amino acids located upstream of prenylated Cys (Fig. 7 A  and B).
Structure-based sequence alignment of residues interacting with PDE is shown in Fig. 7C, which shows that none of the  residues located upstream of prenylated Cys in these structures  are conserved.
Structural superposition shows that, except Thr183,  other residues located upstream of prenylated Cys in KRAS4b  can be small or large and polar or charged amino acids.
In the structural superposition, residue Thr183 in KRAS4b-FMe occupies a  position corresponding to Ser, Thr, and Ile in Rheb, PDE6, and  INPP5E, respectively (2 position in KRAS4b-FMe structure and  1 position in other structures).
In the crystal form II, this position  is occupied by carboxymethyl group of prenylated Cys.
Examination of the proteinprotein interface at 2 position corresponding  to Thr183 in KRAS4b suggests that this position cannot accommodate large amino acids, like Lys, Arg, and Glu (Fig. 7D).
Based  on this rationale we propose that, for any prenylated protein to be  able to bind to PDE, it should have small side chain containing  residues at 1 and 2 positions.
  Sequence alignment of various proteins that have been previously tested for binding to PDE shows no conserved amino  acids upstream of the prenylated Cys (Fig. 7E).
Examination of  residues present at 1 and 2 positions in this alignment shows the  presence of large and charged amino acids, such as Lys, Arg, and  Glu in case of KRAS4a, RalA, RalB, Rac1, and Rheb-L1, suggesting that the presence of these residues would prevent their  ability to bind to PDE.
Although Rheb-L1 has been previously  shown to bind to PDE (20), our analysis indicates that the two  arginines located upstream of prenylated Cys in Rheb-L1 will  sterically clash with PDE at the proteinprotein interface.
  Discussion  The prenyl binding protein PDE has been shown to modulate  signaling through RAS proteins by sustaining their dynamic distribution in cellular membranes (20, 2325).
Impairing KRAS4b  localization at the plasma membrane by inhibiting PDE provides  additional opportunities to target KRAS-driven cancer.
Here,  we present structures of the fully processed KRAS4bPDE complex, which not only provide atomic details of the proteinprotein  Fig. 5.
Structural comparison of two crystal forms of KRAS4bPDE complex shows two possible modes of binding between KRAS4b and PDE. (A) Structural  superposition of PDE residues from two crystal forms showing different positions of farnesyl and methyl groups attached to C185.
Crystal forms I and II are  colored magenta and cyan, respectively.
(B) Enlarged view of structural superposition of HVR residues and farnesylatedmethylated C185 from two crystal  forms showing upstream shift of the HVR residues by two amino acids at the proteinprotein interaction interface in crystal form II, resulting in the empty  space in the central hydrophobic pocket of PDE.
Positions of the farnesyl chains are shown.
Structural superposition of the two crystal forms suggests that  the empty space inside the hydrophobic pocket of PDE in crystal form II would fit an additional five carbons present on the geranylgeranyl chain.
  (C) Schematic diagram showing a 2-aa shift of the HVR residues in crystal form II.
Because of the unique amino acid composition in the region, interaction  interface formed by residues K182-T183-K184 residues in crystal form II mimics the interaction interface formed by residues K180-S181-K183 in crystal form I.  6 of 10 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1615316113 Dharmaiah et al.interaction interface but also, reveal how PDE can bind to different forms of prenylated KRAS4b and why only some prenylated  proteins bind to PDE.
Our binding studies show that the carboxymethyl group present on farnesylated C185 plays a key role in the  KRAS4bPDE interaction (Fig. 1 BE and Fig. S1).
The weak  binding observed in the absence of the methyl group is likely caused  by the charge repulsion effect of the carboxylic acid group and the  decreased hydrophobicity of farnesylated C185.
Our results are  in accordance with the previous findings showing that carboxymethylation of prenylated Rho peptide and catalytic subunits of  PDE6 significantly increases their affinity for RhoGDI and PDE,  respectively (33, 36).
Carboxymethylation is the only step in the  posttranslational modification of the CaaX motif that is potentially  reversible (37).
The importance of the methyl group in KRAS4b  binding to PDE highlights the potential regulatory significance of  this modification in trafficking KRAS4b to cellular membranes.
  Thus, our results suggest that KRAS4b molecules that are not fully  processed (not farnesylated or methylated) will not bind to PDE  and will not be delivered to the plasma membrane.
  Although a large number of RAS structures have been solved  during the preceding 25+ years of structural studies on RAS proteins, these studies did not provide any structural information on  residues present in the HVR.
The structure of the KRAS4bPDE  complex (crystal form II) described here provides atomic details  of the entire HVR (165185) (Fig. 2B and Fig. S2B) and likely  represents a conformation of HVR residues in the cytoplasm  when KRAS4b is bound to PDE.
Additional studies are required  to determine if some of the HVR residues could also form a  similar -helical conformation when KRAS4b is anchored to the  membrane.
Previous studies suggest that, in membrane-bound  KRAS4b, the farnesyl and methyl groups are inserted inside the  membrane bilayer, and the polybasic region present in the HVR  interacts with acidic phospholipids, such as phosphatidylserine or  phosphatidylinositol, that are preferentially located in the inner  leaflet of the plasma membrane (38).
Our mutational analysis of  KRAS4b HVR residues showed that, other than the prenylated  Cys (C185), the composition of the residues located upstream of  C185 also plays a role in KRAS4bPDE interactions.
Although  mutation to alanine of four residues (S181, K182, T183, and K184)  preceding the prenylated C185 was tolerated, mutations of K184  and S181 to an acidic and larger residue like glutamate resulted in  a significant loss of binding (Fig. 3C and Fig. S3C).
Residue S181 is  a part of the proteinprotein interaction interface only in the  crystal form I. The larger proteinprotein interaction interface and  role of S181 of KRAS4b in KRAS4b-FMePDE interaction  Fig. 6.
KRAS4bPDE structure in crystal form II mimics the binding of  KRAS4b-GGMe to PDE and identification of a new sequence motif in the HVR  of KRAS4b. (A) Schematic diagram showing the additional five carbon atoms  present in the geranylgeranyl chain compared with the farnesyl chain.
  (B) Structural superposition of prenylated C185 and the HVR residues from  KRAS4b-FMePDE structure in crystal form I (colored magenta) and modeled  structure of KRAS4b-GGMePDE (colored green) using KRAS4b-FMePDE  structure in crystal form II.
Positions of farnesyl and geranylgeranyl chains are  highlighted.
(C) Structural superposition of geranylgeranylatedmethylated  pentapeptide of PDE6 in complex with PDE (colored light blue; PDB ID code  5ETF) and modeled structure of KRAS4b-GGMe in complex with PDE (colored  green).
Positions of geranylgeranyl chains in these two structures are similar.
  PDE6-GGMe, geranylgeranylatedmethylated PDE6. (D) Sequence alignment of amino acid sequence of the HVR of KRAS4b from various organisms  shows the presence of a unique 5-aa-long sequence motif that allows the  binding of prenylated KRAS4b to PDE as seen in this study.
The HVR residues  proposed to maintain similar proteinprotein interaction in the KRAS4b-FMe  PDE and the KRAS4b-GGMePDE complexes are highlighted by magentaand green-colored lines above the sequence alignment.
  Fig. 7.
Structural and sequence analysis of prenylated proteins that have  been tested previously for binding to PDE. (A) Structural superposition of  PDE in complex with KRAS4b-FMe (crystal form I), farnesylatedmethylated  Rheb (Rheb-FMe; PDB ID code 3T5G), geranylgeranylatedmethylated PDE6  (PDE6-GGMe; PDB ID code 5ETF), and farnesylatedmethylated INPP5e  (INPP5E-FMe; PDB ID code 5F2U).
(B) Enlarged view of prenylated protein/  peptide shown in A. The residues located upstream of prenylated C185 are  numbered from 1 (K184) to 5 (K180).
(C) Structure-based sequence alignment of prenylated protein/peptide shown in A and B. (D) Enlarged view of  the binding pocket formed by PDE residues, where Thr183 in KRAS4b and  corresponding Ser, Thr, and Ile residues in Rheb, PDE6, and INPP5E localize at  proteinprotein interface.
(E) Sequence alignment of various proteins that  have been tested previously for binding to PDE.
Prenylated and palmitoylated Cys are highlighted in yellow and cyan, respectively.
Prenylated proteins  that contain either large polar amino acids at 1 and 2 positions or a second  prenylated Cys site (shown in red) would cause steric clash with PDE residues  and are unlikely to form a proteinprotein complex.
  Dharmaiah et al. PNAS Early Edition | 7 of 10  BIOCHEMISTRY PNAS PLUSindicate that the structure observed in crystal form I represents  the biological interaction of KRAS4b-FMe with PDE.
  Chandra et al. (20) showed that eight lysine residues present  in the polybasic region of the KRAS4b are not necessary for  binding to PDE and that the interaction becomes stronger  when these lysine residues are mutated to glutamate.
They also  showed that diminishing the charge on the polybasic region by  stimulating phosphorylation of S181 with bryostatin-1 enhances  the ability of PDE to solubilize KRAS4b.
Recent studies have  also shown that KRAS suppresses Wnt/Ca2+ signaling pathway  by direct binding with calmodulin and that the KRAS4bcalmodulin interaction is attenuated by phosphorylation of S181  by PKC (39, 40).
Our structural data show that six lysine residues present between 175 and 180 do not interact with PDE  and thus, are not likely to play any role in KRAS4bPDE  interaction.
In contrast to the above-mentioned study, we saw  that mutation of K184 (in the KRAS4b double-mutant T183AK184E) to glutamate showed significant loss of binding affinity  between KRAS4b and PDE.
Also, the S181E mutant showed  significant loss in the binding affinity compared with S181A.
  Analysis of the KRAS4bPDE interaction interface suggests that  phosphorylation of S181 is likely to decrease the binding affinity  between KRAS4b and PDE because of steric hindrance and  charge repulsion, because the side chain atoms of Glu88 of PDE  form hydrogen bonds with the side chain atoms of KRAS4b S181.
  Structure and sequence alignment of prenylated proteins that  have been shown to bind to PDE shows that the residues involved  at the proteinprotein interface are not conserved and that prenylated cysteine can occupy multiple positions inside the central  hydrophobic pocket of PDE.
These observations are in accordance with the known broad specificity of PDE for prenylated  proteins.
The hydrophobic pocket in PDE is too small to accommodate another lipid chain.
Thus, the prenylated proteins that  undergo palmitoylation upstream of the prenylated Cys can bind to  PDE only in the depalmitoylated state.
For example, although  Rab6 contains smaller amino acids upstream of the prenylated Cys,  it cannot bind to PDE, because it becomes geranylgeranylated at  the 3 position as well.
Unlike palmitoylation, prenylation is not a  reversible modification.
Based on our structural and sequence  analysis, we propose that prenylated proteins that contain a residue  with a small side chain at 1 and 2 positions upstream of the  prenylated Cys are likely to bind to PDE.
This hypothesis explains  why other prenylated members of the RAS superfamily, such as  KRAS4a, RalA, RalB, and Rac1, do not bind to PDE.
With this  reasoning, one could predict if a given prenylated protein is likely  to bind to PDE or not.
  Unlike KRAS4b, the HVRs of KRAS4a, HRAS, and NRAS  are mono- or dipalmitoylated at Cys residues located upstream  of the C-terminal Cys.
Palmitoylation of RAS proteins is readily  reversible in vivo and plays a key role in their subcellular localization.
Palmitoylation of HRAS/NRAS at the Golgi stabilizes  their association with membranes.
Depalmitoylation releases  HRAS/NRAS into the cytoplasm, allowing their return to the  Golgi for another round of palmitoylation.
Sequence and structure analysis of KRAS4b and HRAS/NRAS indicates that PDE  should be able to bind to depalmitoylated HRAS/NRAS, because it contains small side chain-containing residues upstream  of prenylated Cys.
As shown previously (20), it is possible that, in a  steady state, the fraction of depalmitoylated HRAS is much less  than that of depalmitoylated NRAS, because HRAS becomes palmitoylated at two positions in the HVR as opposed to just one  position in NRAS.
In accordance with the previous findings that,  unlike KRAS4b, KRAS4a does not bind to PDE (31), our sequence and structural analysis suggests that the steric hindrance  caused by two lysine residues located upstream of prenylated Cys is  likely to interfere with interaction between depalmitoylated  KRAS4a and PDE.
NRAS has been shown to bind to PDE  only in the farnesylated form and not in the geranylgeranylated  form (20).
Although NRAS contains small side chain-containing  amino acids (Met-Gly-Leu-Pro) upstream of prenylated Cys, it is  likely that the presence of a proline residue at 1 position results  in limited flexibility, because proline and its preceding residue  will have restricted  torsion angles in the protein backbone.
  Limited flexibility of residues present at 1 and 2 positions  could possibly affect the binding of geranylgeranylated NRAS  to PDE.
  Structural superposition of PDE in complex with prenylated  proteins/peptides shows that the prenylated Cys of KRAS4b binds  deeper inside the hydrophobic pocket of PDE, and thus, four  additional KRAS4b residues (181184), rather than three, are  located inside the binding pocket of PDE.
Comparison of the  KRAS4bPDE structure in crystal form I with the previously  solved RhebPDE structure (26) shows that W90 and F133  residues in PDE undergo conformational changes to allow more  extensive interaction between KRAS4b and PDE compared with  that between Rheb and PDE (Fig. S5 A and B).
This observation  indicates that PDE interaction with KRAS4b could be more  specific than other prenylated proteins and thus, despite PDE  having broad specificity for prenylated proteins, it could serve as a  potential target for KRAS-driven cancers.
GTP-bound Arl2/Arl3  has been shown to disrupt RASPDE interaction at the membrane (26).
Superposition of the KRAS4bPDE and GTP-bound  Arl2PDE structures shows the possible formation of a ternary  complex.
However, based on an RhebPDE structure, it was  suggested that binding of GTP-bound Arl2 to PDE forces the  latter into a closed conformation by altering the conformation of  two -strands in PDE with the result that the RAS protein can no  longer bind to PDEArl2 complex (26).
  Recently, it was shown that PDE binds to geranylgeranylated  methylated PDE6 pentapeptide with an affinity (Kd = 2.3   0.9 nM) 1,000 times higher than that of the KRAS4b-FMe (30).
  Sequence and structural similarity between our modeled structure  of KRAS4b-GGMePDE and geranylgeranylatedmethylated  PDE6 pentapeptide in complex with PDE supports the potential binding of KRAS4b-GGMe by PDE (Fig. 6C).
It is likely  that the interaction formed by the additional five carbon atoms  present in the geranylgeranyl chain within the hydrophobic pocket  will result in a higher affinity between these two proteins.
  Analysis of the amino acid sequence upstream of C185 showed  the presence of a 5-aa sequence motif (K-S-K-T-K) that allows the  formation of similar proteinprotein interactions in both crystal  forms of KRAS4bPDE complex.
The crucial role played by this  motif in allowing prenylated KRAS4b binding to PDE is supported by the fact that this motif is highly conserved in KRAS4b  across various organisms (Fig. 6D).
Identification of this sequence  motif strengthens our hypothesis that both the KRAS4b-FMe and  KRAS4bGGMe could bind to PDE by shifting the HVR residues by two amino acids toward the N terminus at KRAS4bPDE  interface, allowing PDE to target both forms of prenylated  KRAS4b to cellular membranes.
Based on our sequence and  structural analyses, we suggest that crystal form I shows how  KRAS4b-FMe binds to PDE, whereas crystal form II indicates  how KRAS4b-GGMe could bind to PDE.
It is important to  note here that, until now, the only evidence that KRAS4b can be  geranylgeranylated is in the presence of an FTI.
No physiological  condition has yet been found under which the KRAS4b modification is shifted to geranylgeranylation.
  Despite the significant progress in characterizing the role of  PDE in targeting RAS to the membrane and identifying nanomolar inhibitors that can break KRAS4bPDE interactions, we  need to overcome additional challenges before we can successfully  target PDE for KRAS4b-driven cancers.
Previous studies have  shown that KRAS KO in mice is lethal (41, 42) but that PDE KO  is not (43).
This difference may be because PDE helps in the  localization of KRAS4b, not of KRAS4a, and therefore, only affects  one isoform of KRAS.
Future studies need to focus on determining  8 of 10 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1615316113 Dharmaiah et al.exactly how dependent RAS proteins are on PDE for proper localization to the membrane (20) and on PDE inhibitors that could  target specific interactions between KRAS4bHVR and PDE.
The  biggest challenge would be to design a specific inhibitor that can  avoid any toxic or off-target effects of inhibiting PDE.
One might  also search for molecules that lock KRAS4b and PDE together so  that they become resistant to dissociation in the presence of GTPbound Arl2/Arl3 and thus, decrease population of active KRAS4b at  the plasma membrane.
A therapeutic strategy to alleviate, instead of  eliminate, specific RAS proteins inside the cell might prove effective  in targeting cancer, making PDE a target highly worthy of  attention.
  Materials and Methods  Cloning, Expression, and Purification.
KRAS4b-FMe (human) was cloned,  expressed, and purified using the procedures described previously (44).
Human  PDE was cloned in pDest-566 vector with N-terminal His6-maltose binding  protein tag and expressed in BL21 STAR (rne131) Escherichia coli strain.
Highly  purified untagged proteins were purified using a multistep purification process.
SI Materials and Methods has a detailed methodology on cloning, expression, and purification.
  Crystallization and Data Collection.
Before crystallization setup, purified  KRAS4b-FMe and PDE proteins were mixed in a molar ratio of 1:1 and incubated on ice for 1 h. The complex crystals were grown with the sitting drop  vapor diffusion method by mixing the proteinprotein complex with an equal  volume of reservoir solution containing 0.1 M citrate (pH 5.0) and 20% (wt/vol)  PEG 6000 (crystal form I) and 0.1 M Hepes:NaOH (pH 7.5) and 2 M ammonium  sulfate (crystal form II).
Small crystals appeared in 23 d and grew to full size in  10 d. For data collection, crystals were flash frozen (100 K) in the above reservoir solutions supplemented with 30% (vol/vol) ethylene glycol as a cryoprotectant.
Crystallographic datasets were integrated and scaled using the  XDS (45).
The high-resolution cutoffs of 2.0 and 1.9  were selected for crystal  forms I and II, respectively, because reflections present in the high-resolution  shell have average I/sigma(I) above three, multiplicity close to seven, and  completeness close to 100%, despite having relatively high
Rmerge values.
  Crystal form I belongs to the space group P21 and contains one copy of  KRAS4bPDE complex in the asymmetric unit.
Crystal form II belonged to the  space group P212121 and contains two copies of KRAS4bPDE complex in the  asymmetric unit.
The crystal parameters and the data collection statistics are  summarized in Table S1.
  Structure Determination and Analysis.
Crystal structures of KRAS4b and PDE  complex were solved by molecular replacement as implemented in the program PHASER (46) using the apo-structure of truncated KRAS4b [1169; Protein  Data Bank (PDB) ID code 4OBE] and protein atoms corresponding to PDE in  the farnesylatedmethylated Rheb peptidePDE complex structure (PDB ID  code 3T5G).
Initial map showed interpretable electron density, in which both  the proteins could be built manually.
Additional model improvement was  carried out with alternate rounds of model building via COOT (47) and refinement using Phenix.refine (48, 49) and Refmac (50), with rigid body, simulated annealing, positional, and translationlibrationscrew (TLS) refinement at  different stages.
After a few rounds of refinement, inspection of the difference  (Fo-Fc) map showed positive density for the farnesylated and methylated C185  and GDP.
Placement of ligands were followed by identification of potential  sites of solvent molecules by automatic water-picking algorithm in COOT (47).
The  positions of these automatically picked waters were checked manually during  model building.
The majority of the model has a clear and well-interpretable  electron density map with the exception of switch 1 residues and three to five  residues in HVR in crystal form I, which were omitted in the final model.
Refinement statistics of both crystal forms are given in Table S1.
Structural  comparisons were performed using the SSM algorithm (51) implemented in  COOT.
Figures were prepared using the program PyMOL (52).
All crystallographic and structural analysis software used in this study was compiled and  maintained by the SBGrid consortium (53).
  Binding Affinity Measurements by ITC.
ITC experiments were performed in a  MicroCal PEAQ-ITC (Malvern).
Both KRAS4b and PDE proteins were extensively dialyzed in 20 mM Hepes (pH 7.3), 300 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM  TCEP [tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine].
Before titration, both proteins were  centrifuged at 14,000  g for 5 min to remove any debris and air bubbles.
  Protein concentration was measured using absorbance at 280 nm.
Dialyzed  KRAS4b and PDE proteins were loaded into the calorimeter cell and titration  syringe, respectively.
The calorimetric titrations were carried out at 25 C using  1518 injections of 2.42.6 L each injected at 150- to 180-s intervals.
A control  experiment was performed by titrating PDE into a sample cell that contained  buffer alone, with no significant heat release observed.
Data analysis was  performed based on a binding model containing one set of sites using a  nonlinear least squares algorithm incorporated in the MicroCal PEAQ-ITC  analysis software (Malvern).
  SV-AUC.
To study the interaction of PDE with the different forms of KRAS4b,  1:1 stoichiometric mixtures of PDE:KRAS4b-FMe and PDE:KRAS4b-Far were  studied at different concentrations ranging from 280 M using SV-AUC  technique.
SI Materials and Methods has detailed information on sedimentation velocity experiments.
  PDB ID Codes.
The atomic coordinates and structure factors for KRAS4b-FMe  PDE complex in crystal forms I and II have been submitted to the PDB and  assigned ID codes 5TB5 and 5TAR, respectively.
  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
We thank members of the Protein Expression Laboratory (Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research) for their help in  cloning, protein expression, and purification.
We also thank the staff of ID-24-  C/E beamline at the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory,  for their help with data collection.
We thank Drs. Monika Mehta, Jim Hartley,  and David Heimbrook for critical reading of this manuscript.
This project was  funded in whole or in part with federal funds from National Cancer Institute,  NIH Contract HHSN261200800001E.
This work was funded in part by the  Intramural Research Program of the NIH, the National Institute of Diabetes  and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
Part of this work is based on research  conducted at the Northeastern Collaborative Access Team beamlines, which  are funded by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences from National  Institutes of Health Grant P41 GM103403.
The Pilatus 6M detector on 24-ID-C  beamline is funded by NIH-Office of Research Infrastructure Programs HighEnd Instrumentation Grant S10 RR029205.
This research used resources of the  Advanced Photon Source, a US Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science  User Facility operated for the DOE Office of Science by Argonne National  Laboratory under Contract DE-AC02-06CH11357.
The content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the Department of  Health and Human Services, and the mention of trade names, commercial  products, or organizations does not imply endorsement by the US Government.
  1.
Prior IA, Lewis PD, Mattos C (2012) A comprehensive survey of Ras mutations in  cancer.
Cancer Res 72(10):24572467.
  2. Barbacid M (1987) ras genes.
Annu Rev Biochem 56:779827.
  3. Forbes SA, et al. (2015) COSMIC: Exploring the worlds knowledge of somatic mutations in human cancer.
Nucleic Acids Res 43(Database issue):D805D811.
  4. Bourne HR, Sanders DA, McCormick F (1991) The GTPase superfamily: Conserved  structure and molecular mechanism.
Nature 349(6305):117127.
  5. Wittinghofer A, Pai EF (1991) The structure of Ras protein: A model for a universal  molecular switch.
Trends Biochem Sci 16(10):382387.
  6. Takai Y, Sasaki T, Matozaki T (2001) Small GTP-binding proteins.
Physiol Rev 81(1):153208.
  7. Vigil D, Cherfils J, Rossman KL, Der CJ (2010) Ras superfamily GEFs and GAPs: Validated and tractable targets for cancer therapy?
Nat Rev Cancer 10(12):842857.  8.
Cherfils J, Zeghouf M (2013) Regulation of small GTPases by GEFs, GAPs, and GDIs.
  Physiol Rev 93(1):269309.
  9. Bos JL, Rehmann H, Wittinghofer A (2007) GEFs and GAPs: Critical elements in the  control of small G proteins.
Cell 129(5):865877.  10. Stephen AG, Esposito D, Bagni RK, McCormick F (2014) Dragging ras back in the ring.
  Cancer Cell 25(3):272281.  11.
Cox AD, Der CJ (2010) Ras history: The saga continues.
Small GTPases 1(1):227.
  12. Quinlan MP, Settleman J (2009) Isoform-specific ras functions in development and  cancer.
Future Oncol 5(1):105116.
  13. Nussinov R, Tsai CJ, Chakrabarti M, Jang H (2016) A new view of Ras isoforms in  cancers.
Cancer Res 76(1):1823.
  14. Reid TS, Terry KL, Casey PJ, Beese LS (2004) Crystallographic analysis of CaaX prenyltransferases complexed with substrates defines rules of protein substrate selectivity.
J Mol Biol 343(2):417433.
  15. Hancock JF, Paterson H, Marshall CJ (1990) A polybasic domain or palmitoylation is  required in addition to the CAAX motif to localize p21ras to the plasma membrane.
  Cell 63(1):133139.
  16.
Manolaridis I, et al. (2013) Mechanism of farnesylated CAAX protein processing by the  intramembrane protease Rce1.
Nature 504(7479):301305.
  17. Yang J, et al. (2011) Mechanism of isoprenylcysteine carboxyl methylation from the  crystal structure of the integral membrane methyltransferase ICMT.
Mol Cell 44(6):  9971004.
  18. Berndt N, Hamilton AD, Sebti SM (2011) Targeting protein prenylation for cancer  therapy.
Nat Rev Cancer 11(11):775791.
  19. Whyte DB, et al. (1997) K- and N-Ras are geranylgeranylated in cells treated with  farnesyl protein transferase inhibitors.
J Biol Chem 272(22):1445914464.  Dharmaiah et al. PNAS Early Edition | 9 of 10  BIOCHEMISTRY PNAS PLUS20.
Chandra A, et al. (2011) The GDI-like solubilizing factor PDE sustains the spatial  organization and signalling of Ras family proteins.
Nat Cell Biol 14(2):148158.  21.
Baehr W (2014) Membrane protein transport in photoreceptors: The function of  PDE: The Proctor lecture.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 55(12):86538666.
  22. Zhang H, et al. (2004) Photoreceptor cGMP phosphodiesterase delta subunit (PDEdelta) functions as a prenyl-binding protein.
J Biol Chem 279(1):407413.  23.
Weise K, et al. (2012) Dissociation of the K-Ras4B/PDE complex upon contact with  lipid membranes: Membrane delivery instead of extraction.
J Am Chem Soc 134(28):  1150311510.
  24. Schmick M, et al. (2014) KRas localizes to the plasma membrane by spatial cycles of  solubilization, trapping and vesicular transport.
Cell 157(2):459471.
  25.
Schmick M, Kraemer A, Bastiaens PI (2015) Ras moves to stay in place.
Trends Cell Biol  25(4):190197.
  26. Ismail SA, et al. (2011) Arl2-GTP and Arl3-GTP regulate a GDI-like transport system for  farnesylated cargo.
Nat Chem Biol 7(12):942949.
  27. Nancy V, Callebaut I, El Marjou A, de Gunzburg J (2002) The delta subunit of retinal  rod cGMP phosphodiesterase regulates the membrane association of Ras and Rap  GTPases.
J Biol Chem 277(17):1507615084.
  28. Zimmermann G, et al. (2013) Small molecule inhibition of the KRAS-PDE interaction  impairs oncogenic KRAS signalling.
Nature 497(7451):638642.  29.
Chen YX, et al. (2010) Synthesis of the Rheb and K-Ras4B GTPases.
Angew Chem Int Ed  Engl 49(35):60906095.
  30. Fansa EK, OReilly NJ, Ismail S, Wittinghofer A (2015) The N- and C-terminal ends of  RPGR can bind to PDE6.
EMBO Rep 16(12):15831585.
  31. Tsai FD, et al. (2015) K-Ras4A splice variant is widely expressed in cancer and uses a  hybrid membrane-targeting motif.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112(3):779784.
  32. Karan S, Zhang H, Li S, Frederick JM, Baehr W (2008) A model for transport of  membrane-associated phototransduction polypeptides in rod and cone photoreceptor inner segments.
Vision Res 48(3):442452.
  33. Cook TA, Ghomashchi F, Gelb MH, Florio SK, Beavo JA (2000) Binding of the delta  subunit to rod phosphodiesterase catalytic subunits requires methylated, prenylated  C-termini of the catalytic subunits.
Biochemistry 39(44):1351613523.
  34. Hanzal-Bayer M, Linari M, Wittinghofer A (2005) Properties of the interaction of Arflike protein 2 with PDEdelta.
J Mol Biol 350(5):10741082.
  35. Fansa EK, Ksling SK, Zent E, Wittinghofer A, Ismail S (2016) PDE6-mediated sorting of  INPP5E into the cilium is determined by cargo-carrier affinity.
Nat Commun 7:11366.  36. Mondal MS, Wang Z, Seeds AM, Rando RR (2000) The specific binding of small molecule  isoprenoids to rhoGDP dissociation inhibitor (rhoGDI).
Biochemistry 39(2):406412.
  37. Chelsky D, Ruskin B, Koshland DE, Jr (1985) Methyl-esterified proteins in a mammalian  cell line.
Biochemistry 24(23):66516658.
  38. Roy MO, Leventis R, Silvius JR (2000) Mutational and biochemical analysis of plasma  membrane targeting mediated by the farnesylated, polybasic carboxy terminus of  K-ras4B. Biochemistry 39(28):82988307.
  39. Bivona TG, et al. (2006) PKC regulates a farnesyl-electrostatic switch on K-Ras that  promotes its association with Bcl-XL on mitochondria and induces apoptosis.
Mol Cell  21(4):481493.
  40. Wang MT, et al. (2015) K-Ras Promotes Tumorigenicity through Suppression of Noncanonical Wnt Signaling.
Cell 163(5):12371251.
  41. Johnson L, et al. (1997) K-ras is an essential gene in the mouse with partial functional  overlap with N-ras.
Genes Dev 11(19):24682481.
  42. Plowman SJ, et al. (2003) While K-ras is essential for mouse development, expression  of the K-ras 4A splice variant is dispensable.
Mol Cell Biol 23(24):92459250.
  43. Zhang H, et al. (2007) Deletion of PrBP/delta impedes transport of GRK1 and PDE6  catalytic subunits to photoreceptor outer segments.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104(21):  88578862.  44. Gillette WK, et al. (2015) Farnesylated and methylated KRAS4b: High yield production  of protein suitable for biophysical studies of prenylated protein-lipid interactions.
Sci  Rep 5:15916.
  45. Kabsch W (2010) Xds. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 66(Pt 2):125132.
  46. McCoy AJ, et al. (2007) Phaser crystallographic software.
J Appl Cryst 40(Pt 4):658674.
  47. Emsley P, Lohkamp B, Scott WG, Cowtan K (2010) Features and development of Coot.  Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 66(Pt 4):486501.  48.
Adams PD, et al. (2010) PHENIX: A comprehensive Python-based system for macromolecular structure solution.
Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 66(Pt 2):213221.
  49. Afonine PV, et al. (2012) Towards automated crystallographic structure refinement  with phenix.refine.
Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 68(Pt 4):352367.
  50. Murshudov GN, et al. (2011) REFMAC5 for the refinement of macromolecular crystal  structures.
Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 67(Pt 4):355367.
  51. Krissinel E, Henrick K (2004) Secondary-structure matching (SSM), a new tool for fast  protein structure alignment in three dimensions.
Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr  60(Pt 12):22562268.
  52.
Schrodinger, LLC (2015) The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 1.8 (Schrodinger, LLC, New York).
  53. Morin A, et al. (2013) Collaboration gets the most out of software.
eLife 2:e01456.
  54. Zhao H, Brautigam CA, Ghirlando R, Schuck P (2013) Overview of current methods in  sedimentation velocity and sedimentation equilibrium analytical ultracentrifugation.
  Curr Protoc Protein Sci 20:20.12.
  55. Zhao H, et al. (2013) Recorded scan times can limit the accuracy of sedimentation  coefficients in analytical ultracentrifugation.
Anal Biochem 437(1):104108.  56. Schuck P (2000) Size-distribution analysis of macromolecules by sedimentation velocity ultracentrifugation and lamm equation modeling.
Biophys J 78(3):16061619.  57.
Cole JL, Lary JW, P Moody T, Laue TM (2008) Analytical ultracentrifugation: Sedimentation velocity and sedimentation equilibrium.
Methods Cell Biol 84:143179.
  58. Pace CN, Vajdos F, Fee L, Grimsley G, Gray T (1995) How to measure and predict the  molar absorption coefficient of a protein.
Protein Sci 4(11):24112423.
  59.
Zhao H, Brown PH, Schuck P (2011) On the distribution of protein refractive index  increments.
Biophys J 100(9):23092317.
  60. Zhao H, Schuck P (2015) Combining biophysical methods for the analysis of protein  complex stoichiometry and affinity in SEDPHAT. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr  71(Pt 1):314.
  61. Johnson ML (1992) Why, when, and how biochemists should use least squares.
  Anal Biochem 206(2):215225.
  10 of 10 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1615316113 Dharmaiah et al.
